Interviewer: Good afternoon! My name is Angelina, I am a student at the Higher School of Economics, and as part of my thesis I am conducting a research project aimed at studying social norms and expectations in Russia. During the interview, I will be asking you questions that I will ask you to answer as sincerely and thoroughly as possible, also referring to your personal experience or, if none exists, to the experience of your acquaintances. For further convenience, I will be recording on a voice recorder, but all data will be anonymous and will be used in a general way. Are you ready? Then tell me a little about yourself at the beginning, I've already introduced myself. Tell me your name, what you do.
Informant: My name is Svetlana, I am 47 years old. I work in trade, and in my free time I like to do creative work, in general, I like it very much.
Interviewer: It's great when you have hobbies besides work. Then, let's get to the questions. First I will ask you to draw a small picture (graph). A graph of your life, it will look like this: there will be a scale, in the middle will be your age. Yes, conditionally, let's say, from ten to eighty years old or even less, as you will see for yourself. From your age will be your past, and after that will be your future. As you imagine it. And here I will ask you, as you can draw something like a line. Let's say at the age of 15 I had some great success, something good happened, then something bad happened that you consider important. How your life line was going. And then how do you think it would go.
Informant: Well, I see. What do you want me to draw? It's a difficult task, really. Well, if you start from ten, from ten, at ten I had a sad family event, let's say. I'll mark these milestones for myself, now I'm forty-seven. And then I don't know. A hundred. That's it. I expect to live a long time, I dream. I have such milestones all ending in sevens, and now, probably, this is the year. But how to evaluate my life with a schedule, I don't know.
Interviewer: How would it be more convenient? I don't know myself, I just had this idea. And how would it be more convenient for a person to show all his positive and negative points?
Informant: I will draw marks for myself now, further, I really don't know what will happen, I don't know when I will even retire and whether I will retire at all, and whether I will receive money or a normal pension, in general, in principle. So, well, to be honest, I actually have a depressive mood about my past and I don't see anything good in the past right now, analyzing it. Purely, if you think about the attitude, for example, of my life in my state at least, there was the Soviet past, it was Soviet, I went to school. I was a pioneer, octobyabrenok, etc. Komsomol was not. At 22 or 23 I came to God. I studied at a "bible school." That's a milestone for me. When I was 10, I buried my father. Things were bad. Things started to get tough. And they never really ended. I really don't know, Angelina, how best to write, to paint it all. I can't ... understand.
Interviewer: How do you assess the moment when you came to God? Was it a significant positive accomplishment of your life?
Informant: I started dreaming. I thought that my dreams would come true and everything would be cool. With this hope I came to God. But it didn't work out. Now even I probably have a better attitude to God and understand better why I did it then. Back then, I was clueless. I don't know how to draw a timeline because I actually had my daughter at 27. At 37, I had surgery. I had my uterus removed. I was diagnosed with cancer in general. There. But thank God I didn't have to be treated for it. God spared me.
Interviewer: And how did the people around you feel about these events?
Informant: The people around you. And there were no people around except my mom, with whom we were with all the way. A mom is a mom. At the age of 10, for example, when she lost her father it was a fiasco year for her, I think, that is her life. A husband. With two kids without a husband, it's awesome. With her husband, they were dreaming, they were building something, they were planning, and suddenly he was gone. They just started their life, actually. But my childhood was over. I immediately. I became my mom's oldest, main helper. I don't know, really. I have no idea how to write this schedule for me, but for me, it's all below board. Simple. My whole life. Yes. The special time of my...probably the two-thousandth, when it became more or less better in Russia with work at all, that's when it became easier for me. But the times in the "bible", these 90's - it was just a failure, because it was a disaster of my life, really. No work, nothing to live on, but it was just a disaster, just a disaster. At the end of the 90s, I gave birth to a daughter, and I was alone. I kicked my dad out right away. Because Dad was from a good family in quotes. And now I'm reaping the benefits of the same thing. I don't know how to paint it. I think when I got out of surgery, I think it took me about three years to come to my senses. Because it was very hard for me to accept that something was removed. Just for me. It's bad. Everything is bad.
Interviewer: I get it. In fact, in the last interview, the person also had a really hard time drawing that line, and he was like, "well, I guess something like that, like straight, like."
Informant: But here's me too. I don't have it drawn. I guess maybe right here was even better. This right here, this right here, this right here, this right here, this right here, just like this. Here because of the fact that, well, I survived the operation and everything else, but some moment of growing up happened, my personal growing up after the birth of my daughter and some difficulties still let us grow up, it went up anyway. It was more or less here, but these 90s just knocked me out. In fact, I hate our state for what they did to me, to my life. Because I will not see my pension, because in the 90s I did not work, I have no seniority, nothing. I worked where I could. In our village you could get a job as a salesman, and it was very cool, because some people didn't even have that. They had nothing to live on. They then drank themselves to death.
Interviewer: So a lot of people had it even worse.
Informant: Yes, yes. So I was still fine. And now I have more or less everything is stable. That's how it is. And from now on I think it will be better.
Interviewer: Sure, sure, sure. You have to think positive.
Informant: Yeah. In the future, I think I'll have everything like this, like this, like this. It's going to be cool. Someday I'll go to God. There'll be a higher...higher sky.
Interviewer: I was wondering about that age when you came to God. Did it help you in any way? Did it change your attitude toward your life? And maybe some future obstacles, how did you perceive them?
Informant: I guess so, yeah. A lot, though, but kind of, I thought, what broke in my life. To me "bible" played a big role very much in my life, because I went almost immediately to "bible" and there were laid such basics of biblical. That is exactly the understanding of God's word as to the law. That is, first of all, the study of the Bible and certain things applicable in life from the Bible. For example, I memorized certain things in relation to raising children and when I was raising my daughter, I remembered them and used them actually. They're even partly biblical, partly psychological. I realized that, for example, you can't hit a child in anger, that's imprinted well on me. I never did that, I mean, always with a sober head. She and I agreed that if she didn't obey, I would punish her. And she carried the belt herself. We gave her a few spanks, that is, we gave her a few spanks, and she took it normally. That is, it was not such a blind fierce punishment, when just there "aaaaah" parents get angry. And I think that it influenced, probably, "bible", because without this knowledge I do not know what kind of parent I would be. So. And in general, of course, the "bible" influenced everything, my whole life in general.
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. My interview is based on several semantic themes, which are organized along the life line: from the past to the future. And so the first one is about your ideas about career and education. What do you think a successful career consists in? What is it in your perception?
Informant: In my perception. I think that a person is happy when he realizes himself. When he has found his vocation, when he understands something, what he is doing makes him happy, he loves it, he invests in it with pleasure. And besides the fact that it brings him financial success, yes, it also brings him satisfaction: moral, mental, as it were. But in our world, it seems to me, this is not the case. We have a career right now, I understand, even me with my life in the warehouse, my career has taken place there, I don't want to go anywhere else. I feel fine in my warehouse, in my environment, and I realize that I could achieve something more somewhere, but I don't want to. I have enough, I feel good, I'm well paid, I have enough. But a successful career, it seems to me, is when a person has achieved something and financially it's good. That is, there should be a high salary, a good salary, and a job that you like.
Interviewer: And what is more valued in Russia: a high salary or a favorite job?
Informant: It seems to me that in Russia people do not realize themselves at all. I think we just don't have it in Russia. There are only a few people who work in their favorite fields, because they have really found themselves. Mostly people just work to make money, not because they love what they do. That's the way I see it.
Interviewer: Do you agree that many people, despite their efforts and hard work, do not have a professional destiny?
Informant: I agree, of course. Yes.
Interviewer: Were there any, maybe... is that in relation to you or to people you know?
Informant: Oh, well, it probably applies to me too. I don't know where I would have been realized in principle, because initially, initially I would have gone to study at the "art school", after my...after my school. But I didn't go there. Why? Because I didn't have the financial means. I couldn't live in a dormitory, because there was no dorm at the "art school", and I couldn't drive every day, because it's far from my village. That was it. The "art school" was in Moscow. That's it. And because of that, I had already received the education that I could get at that time and, accordingly, went to work where I went to work. There was still Soviet distribution at that time. So I got caught up in it. But, again, with all that, I kind of don't see myself in that, basically, in any way.
Interviewer: Would you like to try to go back to what you really want to do now?
Informant: I wanted to. I think about it. I dream about it, but it's been on my mind for a long time, but nothing happens. There's not enough determination. I don't believe it. I don't believe that in our state you can do what you love to do and make an income. Without getting shanked and beaten by your own state. I don't believe that.
Interviewer: So it is mainly the low profitability that hinders you?
Informant: Yes. For example, if I were to do something, I would do something creative. For example, I like design, I like to make repairs at home, I like it. These are all things I love, I enjoy it. I like to do all kinds of stuff, I mean, creative stuff like that. Here. I realize that if I took it up, I would do something from this opera, I would try it. But I, for one thing, I don't have enough education on this. I'd study some more, of course, on these things. Here. And, secondly, I realize that you need, first of all, to have some kind of financial head start on it, a certain territory to do it, and to get into all this, you need to open an IE somehow and that's it. And then the difficulties begin. Just difficulties, because I saw in the 90s how our state and all those who have any state power, that is, the police, now the police, firefighters, tax officials, how they all ripped off the private sector. So I don't trust our state.
Interviewer: And the totality of all these barriers stops you?
Informant: Yes. I wouldn't dare. Exactly, because I can imagine how many people would come and want to fuck me. I don't want to. I'm just, I'm afraid of it. I'm just scared. I realize that I'm powerless against them.
Interviewer: I understand. Now let's talk about education. Let's go a little further. What does it mean to get a good education? It's the same as with career, only about education.
Informant: About education. I think in our state, they've disfigured the whole school. They've disfigured it. The school program. Because they teach subjects backwards and forwards, because I've seen it. I was with my daughter with my daughter. Somehow it was gradual. I went through some certain knowledge and comprehended further and further, i.e. deepened in some things. Now, I studied with Alyona, I realize that some things just jump over, then come back, some things... ugly, in short. Okay, that's not even the point. I think that we lack this direction of some kind of profile for the child, so that the child understands what he wants. That is, somehow they don't move him in this regard, and I still think that our people, even the same teachers, are disfigured by the Soviet past and Soviet upbringing, and they can't give what modern students, children in general, need. To guide them in some way, and to make them realize themselves somehow, really, on their own.
For example, I can't even find my daughter that zest, that direction, that she would be realized where. I don't understand what she can be realized in. That's what she has talents in. I don't see. Here. It seems to me that the school should identify the child somehow. In any case, to activate all these things, to be able to raise them at school. But we don't have that. And then the child can choose a direction where he or she is interested, where he or she realizes that he or she can cope, can do it, wants to, likes it.
Interviewer: Is there a difference between the style of education in Moscow, in big cities and in the regions? Because there are private specialized schools, where there is a division by profiles, what is more interesting for a child: biology, physics or social sciences.
Informant: I think that in big cities there is all this. For example, in mine, in real life, there is no such thing. Although it's just the Moscow suburbs. It's not some bear corner, it's the Moscow suburbs. And there is nothing there. There are two schools there. I agree, there are all kinds of music schools, there are all kinds of clubs. So there's something for kids to do. But purely education, school subjects, there are no certain directions, topics, so that a child could really go deep. Well, there is no such thing. It's not enough, I think.
Interviewer: And what do you think is more valuable in education? Getting specific skills for a job or intellectual development?
Informant: I think both are important. I think that's the way it seems to me.
Interviewer: Did people around you, maybe your mother, have any expectations about your future profession? Your future education? What will you become?
Informant: I had expectations from my mom that I would have my own place, which I don't have. That's all. And about the profession, woo. Even we finished technical school, and I should end up in a laboratory as a profession. But the lab is a very high-profile place. And it's not easy to get in. I got into the control room, and that was cool. But I was out of there as soon as the man got off maternity leave. I ended up with a rag on the production floor. In a factory. And it's still at that time still cheto work, then we just started to cut, cut and it just got worse. And I realized that everything was falling apart, just everything was falling apart. The Soviet Union was collapsing, and nothing had been built. I realized that no housing, nothing was going to happen to me there. For some reason I didn't hold on, because I was sure that I was a failure. I was in that period of time when people were losing everything and there was no possibility to buy anything at all. I didn't believe that my state would take care of me. I saw that the people who sat at the troughs, at some kind of managerial apparatus, they grabbed it by the ass, and everyone else just stayed and died in poverty. All of them. Dying, drinking and dying in poverty. I saw that. For me, I realized that everything was fucked.
Interviewer: So at that time connections decided everything?
Informant: Yes. Connections. Places. Where you work, who you work with, what place.
Interviewer: Did your mother, did your brother, did your mother, did your mother, did your brother, did the people around you have any expectations about how your life was going to turn out? Maybe that you would get married, how many children you would have. Apart from housing, how did they (the people around you) envision your future? Did they tell you about it in any way?
Informant: I don't know. We somehow never discussed such things. Well, in childhood, of course, my mother said, learn something, you will have a family, how will you feed your husband, how will you feed your husband, you don't know how to do anything. You should learn how to cook.
Interviewer: Did you learn, yes, after that?
Informant: Nope. No. I... I learned. I learned to cook better than my mother at one time. I realized that I was just ahead of her in that. But I wasn't really into it. In fact, I still don't. But because I have no time for it, nothing, no one to cook for. I don't always want to cook for myself.
Interviewer: In your childhood, maybe even now, did you have to lie in order not to let down your family's expectations?
Informant: No, not really. It's not customary for us.
Interviewer: So basically always honest?
Informant: Uh-huh. Honestly, or you don't say anything at all. But for that matter, if, for example, when I was diagnosed with cancer, I didn't tell my mom anything. She didn't know anything. When I had it all figured out, then I told her the story. And that was it.
Interviewer: Did you ever feel pressured by your parents as a child?
Informant: Well, of course. My mom controlled me, built me up left and right.
Interviewer: What did that manifest itself in?
Informant: Everything. First of all, I had, how to say-...... pressure. I understood that my mom needed to be helped. It's just that I've been dealing with it recently. Anyway. What I'm doing now is soul healing. It's all about psychology and communicating with God. And I realized that when there was a funeral, one of my mom's friends said that I was the main helper at my mom's house, and it made a certain impression on me. I realized that I had to help with Denis, babysit my little brother. I realized that I really had to pitch in, so I did. I did it "be - hello". Then my mom was controlling on her own, she just...I was really depressed by her silence. I'm just the kind of person who needs to explain everything, tell everything, communicate as closely as possible. I'm very -- trusting relationships are very important to me. In fact, if I don't have one, I consider that person an acquaintance. And that's why I had very difficult relations with my mother, because she started to keep silent for any of my misdemeanors, and I just had a brain explosion on this topic. I was very dashing. And she, yes, she built me up.
I had a certain routine - a stricture, I thought, because I had a friend, with whom we still communicate, in childhood, she had a complete family, but it's true there were their own cockroaches, they had three children, she was the eldest and two brothers. And I could go to her place, she'd be doing stuff, and I'd have a day off and it'd be a major cleaning job. So she goes for a walk, she comes to me, and I clean up. So this is the norm of my life. So there are certain things and there was always a certain responsibility. And so then we would get together, I remember, we always had a war, what I would wear. I didn't want to wear it, and I was forced to wear it. And that's what it was all about. It was like, I don't know, I guess as I got older I felt more pressure. When I left home when I was 15, I think. And we-- my mom didn't trust me, for some reason. And her mistrust of me just pissed me off. Just such situations, for example, such a situation, which was remembered for the whole life, in general, I still remember it.
The first year, I think, she gave me money, of course she gave me money for housing, about 15-20 rubles a week. And she gave me money, I don't remember how much, for a winter item - a fur coat. I bought myself an artificial coat, it was made into a jacket. And it was November, not very cold, as if it was too early to dress, but it's already 2 weeks and all this will dress. I bought it, but I didn't take it home. Well, I think, what's the point? Well, in two weeks I'll come in it and show everything. My mom literally kicked me out of the house, she said: "go get it for me." I mean, she didn't believe I bought it. And I was just offended that they didn't believe me. I've never, I've never given anyone a reason not to believe me. And it was really depressing when I came home on the weekends and my mom wouldn't talk to me. She wouldn't talk to me. Not at all. I mean, I come home, I missed them, I'm there, last weekend I didn't come, we had a disco.
Well, I didn't come, there are boys, girls, some other stuff. Suddenly I arrive and nobody welcomes me except my brother. Nobody welcomes me at all. My mom doesn't talk to me at all. That's it. I don't know if it's pressure or not. Well, it's pressure, because there were such fights.
Interviewer: Does it have any impact on your life now?
Informant: I've sorted out a lot of things, I think. But some things remained as old grudges, maybe, but I've dealt with them. Anyway, I have overcome many things. Thanks to being a mom myself. And thanks to the fact that with my mom still figure things out and live in the same house and still communicate. But still silent for years. Years now. The last time she didn't talk for a year or so. Well, in general, probably, thanks to the fact that I am still in the church with this Sozo (Service Sozo - a unique ministry of inner healing), I am thinking about these things, well, I pull out and solve, that is, I deal with it. Like some dirty laundry, which was buried somewhere not far away, and so I periodically just pull it out and get some things that I pull out, either I deal with them and throw them away, or I wash them and start using them, that is how it is.
Interviewer: So religion helps you deal with that at all?
Informant: Well it didn't help me all that much until recently. I don't think so. But, with this POPE, I'm a little bit so... everything turned around for me, because there was a period of growing up when I came to church, I left, and I also had a relationship with God, like I was communicating, I was not communicating, I didn't need to, I.... Well, the depressive nature of it is complicated. It is. And then... now here I am with this POPE now that I've graduated. First of all, it's training, and they teach exactly, I mean, the Americans have it all on psychology and since I didn't study psychology at all and for me... I realized that for me it's an interesting science. I realized that, I got into it, and when I got into it, into this study, I thought that I would do it only for myself. And when I opened the book, god spoke to me that shorter is not just for (you) me. That God will work through it, i.e. I can serve and help someone else. And that made me happy, because I thought I was useless. Well, I had my own-- I'm just saying, depressive nature. There are different attitudes towards yourself.
Interviewer: Let's move on to the present. Do you feel completely free to make decisions, if not, what... who limits you?
Informant: Decision making. Decision making is very difficult for me in general. Especially some significant decisions that affect my life. They are very difficult for me. And very often, I realized that I always considered myself a moral freak. I used to call myself that, at least in my youth, in my adolescence, I used to say that I was a moral freak. And I recently realized that due to the fact that there are a lot of these unhealed mental moments, I don't know what I want. I don't know my desires, I'm a very complex person, I was stiff, in any case, God is slowly pulling some things out, and I'm sorting it all out, I'm growing up. By the time I'm fifty, I'll be more confident morally. Decisions are very hard for me, and my decisions are probably influenced by everything. Everything around me. I can not, for example, decide on some things, because I realize that I can not afford it financially, then, there are some moral things, certain limits that I can not overstep for myself. For example, I can't lie, for example, or steal. I can't afford it, simply because I think it's unacceptable. So there's a lot of decisions to make. No, I don't make any decisions, I guess, that serious.
Interviewer: And who can help you make a decision, do you ask someone for advice on what is the best thing to do?
Informant: Who? Generally, if I have some kind of a question that is not very global, but easy, I can talk to everyone, to everyone I know, I can talk to everyone. But at the same time I will make my personal conclusions, which I understand that they are to my heart. This is what I agree with most of my soul, let's say. Then I will make a decision. But I can talk to many people, I can talk to all the guys at work, I can consult them: "You know, I have such a situation, do you think that if I do this, do you think that if I do this it will be bad? No? What if I do this?". I mean, I can turn to my colleagues at work, I can talk to my mom, I will naturally talk to my mom, if we are not on opposite sides. Right now we're not on opposite sides, we communicate normally. I finally probably started to treat my mom more evenly, although I do not know what will happen there, because the last silence it pissed me off. With my mom, definitely, with my friends. Well friends I have few, there is a friend in Moscow, with whom we are now here from vacation came and do not communicate, it is very difficult. But yes, with her too.
Interviewer: In general, in modern society, can a person ask others for help or advice, or only rely on himself and not open up to anyone at all? What has happened to me, what should I do?
Informant: In general I understand that it is normal to ask for help, purely psychologically I understand that it is normal, we should be interconnected in society, because we live, we are social persons, let's start with that. But it's very hard for me to ask for help, I realize that I'm still going through this process of changing my brain, it's still going on, it's still going on, I'm in the middle of it. But I know it's necessary. It's necessary - just to ask people for help and, for example, in my church I realize that I can get it. Well it's probably only at church, at work... at work I can ask for help too, and the guys can help with something too.
Interviewer: And in general everybody else, do you think most people can ask for help from other people or do they keep it all to themselves?
Informant: Most people, if only family.
Interviewer: Only the closest ones?
Informant: Yes, only the closest ones. It seems to me that man is really a wolf to man. That's how I feel.
Interviewer: Let's move on to the next thematic blocks. In what cases or under what conditions do you think a person can really work?
Informant: For my own self. For me personally, I caught myself that this is my personal perception, that if I, for example, do home repairs, yes, my favorite occupation, I do it from the heart, I do it in good faith. I'm generally a do-it-yourself kind of person, I like to either do it well, or it's better not to do it at all. It's better not to do it at all, here. And if I do it for me, I do it 100 percent well, that is, I want to do it well. I will try, I will consume all my knowledge, opportunities and strength, in general, everything to do well, conscientiously. Here. At work? At work I do well too, I don't like to do badly, I just don't like to do badly because I don't like it when it's done badly. When somebody else does badly I don't like it, I'll correct him, I'll teach him to do well. But it seems to me, if a person has found his vocation, he will do well there. And if a person, he is poorly paid, if he is not appreciated, he will do well. Because my mom for example, she still works as a janitor, she is 70 years old, she still works as a janitor. Now, as things are changing, she used to clean one house and around it, respectively, a certain territory, and she received for it about 15000, let's say. Years passed, more than one year, she added another house and added, well literally, 3000.
Interviewer: Why not 15000?
Informant: No, it wasn't 15000. On top of that they did what? They made, for example, if my mother went on vacation, a person has to clean these two houses for her. But people do not want to work, because who cleaned, and they were not paid, that is, no part-time work, there is nothing like that. They just cheat at every step, and my mom - she treats her work, she is a conscientious person and employee, she worked hard for me, she left half of her health at her factory, she worked there for a huge length of service. With all this, she does the minimum at her job, because, firstly, very "kind" neighbors who are always dissatisfied with something and secondly "very good" pay, so she works as much as she is paid. And that's what she says: "I work exactly as much as they pay me and I will not do more than they pay me. I won't, on principle." And she's right, and I totally agree with her. That's it.
Interviewer: And in general with other people, does the result you get at work always lead to a deserved reward?
Informant: No, I think that we have very little of that, in Russia anyway.
Interviewer: And what about people? Do they put up with it?
Informant: People have nowhere to go, people have nowhere to go. For example, let's take my specific situation, I never dreamed of working as a storekeeper, but I worked in trade, because I had to, because I didn't see any other situation, there was no other work at the time of our devastation, perestroika, all this. I worked in trade, and I realized that I get tired of people, just morally exhausted. I don't want to communicate with them, I don't want to see a lot of people every day, every second, and I don't want to put myself out there, well, it just exhausts me morally, the warehouse is easier. I got to the warehouse, but again I realize that now, now the trend is literally the last year, I do not talk to anyone in my environment - my brother at another job at another company, what does the employer do? The employer cuts people around you, the people he cut, their responsibilities fall on you, and the salary as it was given to me three years ago, so it is still the same salary, and you have added responsibilities. And so everyone with whom I communicate, the whole circle of my acquaintances lives this way now. This is exactly the trend, it's been going on for the last year or two.
Interviewer: But there's nothing you can do about it?
Informant: I can't do anything about it. Otherwise I'll lose my job and I'll just end up even lower financially. Yeah, so I resign myself to it and sit on what I'm sitting on. I can't change anything, because from mine, if I go to Moscow, I will lose a lot of time and effort to travel, and money even more. So I work where I work, and so far I am holding on to this place. I would love to quit and do something of my own, but I don't see any opportunities yet.
Interviewer: Are there some people who put in no effort or minimal effort but they get a lot more than those who really work hard?
Informant: I don't know, I don't know, I don't have such people in my neighborhood. Probably our Russian golden youth, who are all these majors, and who, yes, they may have had parents at some point, and I don't really believe that we have people in Russia who are rich because they were able to earn something. I don't believe that. I see that the people who got rich were at the trough during perestroika. That's my opinion, and I can't do anything about it, I don't know how to change my mind, but I believe that the people who were at the trough are rich now. And the people who were at the machine, they remained beggars, they got drunk and turned into bums, that's all.
Interviewer: "He who doesn't take risks doesn't drink champagne", do you agree with this statement and does it apply to you?
Informant: Risk is a noble thing, but I'm afraid to take risks.
Interviewer: Why, what should be the conditions, what should be the result, what should happen for you to decide to take a risk?
Informant: I don't know. . . I'm probably not a risk taker at all, it's not about me. Risk is not for me. I took a risk in my twenties when I quit my job and went to the "bible". And, in fact, I don't know.
Interviewer: What are some of the barriers? Why?
Informant: Financial. Financial first of all, any risk is, well, for example, to take a risk now and change, well, for me the risk is to change my life, yes, probably. And to change life, it seems to me, the older you get, the more difficult it is.
Interviewer: And if we talk about smaller risks, it's still a very broad concept, like jumping off a mountain, let's say? Or to climb on a desk, to dance on a desk in the office, that's how a person wants to do it?
Informant: No, that's not my story at all. No, I can try something for myself, like jumping off a cliff with a parachute, for example. It's adrenaline, it's a certain thrill, I guess, I'm interested in it, I could probably try it. Like my brother about two years ago, he went skiing, on one ski, he started doing it, he liked it, he tried it, he started to get good at it, he quit. He also went parachuting, he jumped, he didn't see it in the army, he was in other troops. Like that I can understand and that's fine with me, but here's the social risk.
Interviewer: Social?
Informant: The kind of, like becoming on the table, no, that's not about me. It's not about me at all, I'm a very quiet fellow. No I'm not a public person at all.
Interviewer: What's stopping you?
Informant: I had a bitter experience in my time at school, I think I should probably deal with it, I don't know how, I haven't gotten to the point of dealing with it yet. But I had a bitter experience, I was in the 3rd grade in front of the school on stage, in front of the whole school, with a handwritten text written by my teacher, our classmate "Report on the work done by our pioneer group". I was reading, reading, reading, some kind of list, there should be some closing verb of this whole sentence, and I realize that there is no verb. I froze, the sentence was not finished, the professors were sitting behind me, they started yelling at me, whispering, of course in a low voice, and I froze, I was paralyzed. And after that I, and the whole school, I was sitting there myself, I know how it looks like, someone is singing something, and you are sitting there minding your own business, that is, you don't care who is performing there, how, but the very fact, the feeling of standing in front of this crowd for the rest of your life. I really don't like it very much, although I know that probably someday, I think so, I think so, that probably someday I will have to learn how to perform.
It's very hard for me to communicate even in a company, I'm actually just getting out of this stupor, I don't even know what it is, it's complexes. These are complexes that have been there since childhood. I don't know how to express my thoughts in public, it's very difficult for me. One-on-one I easily communicate with any person, and I bring people to frankness, people trust me, I know how to listen, it's all normal. But it is necessary to gather a crowd, I roared here in front of God literally three years ago, I was on my way from work, we had another meeting, and I realized that I was coming from it and I just have a tightness inside. I'm just shackled inside. I started yelling to God, I roared, I prayed, and some fetters collapsed, because I felt better. I saw the result after that roaring. But I prayed, I roared, I heard some words of comfort, then I called my friend, she prayed for me. So it's a risk, it depends.
Interviewer: Similar question: have you ever had situations in your life where you thought "what other people will think of me"?
Informant: All the time, I thought about it for a very long time. I still do some things, but I worry about how I'm going to be looked at at work, for example. I'm very much always worried about that.
Interviewer: Does it affect your decision making? On your actions?
Informant: Yes, it affects, but it's like, well, it's some small things, actions.
Interviewer: So a person can think, but still kind of act? It's like "hey, it's okay, they'll think, let them think whatever they want".
Informant: Well, I've been struggling with this my whole life, because I was very rebellious when I was in my teens and my family kept trying to reassure me in this way - people have children like children, and you, and you! And it pissed me off all the time, to be honest, I rebelled against these statements, and I really wanted to leave the village, because I hated my village. Just like my daughter now, just like that. Because there is nowhere to jump, if you fart there, they will say: "What have you done, ay-ay-ay!" So.
Interviewer: Have you ever had situations where you couldn't stop feeling guilty?
Informant: There are still things, I was looking into psychology here recently, again I've been getting into this stuff, lately I've been listening just listening and watching because I never studied psychology myself, but I'm interested, here. And I realized that there is an underlying feeling of guilt, I have it, and I'm trying to deal with it, that is the guilt is overwhelming me. For example, now I have this situation with my daughter, I have this guilt that I gave birth to a child without a husband. I never married him, I had a child with the man I had a child with. I was just talking to your mom about this yesterday, that it's my fault that I didn't teach her, it's my fault that I didn't raise her right, it's my fault that she grew up without a husband, it's my fault that I made these and these and these choices that affected who she is as a result. And this feeling of guilt, it doesn't leave me, although I'm trying to deal with it, I'm trying to get rid of it, but it's very difficult. I have guilt about a lot of things.
Interviewer: Can you tell me what is the essential difference between guilt and shame?
Informant: I have this difference, I feel ashamed, it overwhelms me actually, the feeling of shame, even more than guilt did until recently, now I feel better about it. The shame. It was eating me up. Guilt is when you, uh, it kind of goes along with a sense of duty, that is, you haven't done something, so it's your fault. And shame is when you just feel ashamed and want to hide, that is more related to fear. Shame is the fear that you are not understood, you are condemned, you are ashamed not even that they condemned you, but that you could not pour it out properly and you are ashamed of it. So shame is fear, guilt is still a duty.
Interviewer: And if we talk about fear, in what cases is a person afraid to suppress some social norms?
Informant: Yes, yes. I don't know, I think fear is everyone's limit, as well as shame, guilt and duty. For me fear, I was afraid of people for a long time, I mean, it was very hard for me to express my thoughts and feelings to at least 3 people or more, and I was very often covered, to be honest, now it has almost stopped, but it used to be like that. For example, I had a quarrel with someone, especially at work, that is, if there is a family at home, it's still a little bit different relations and it's easier there, but I had my own there too. And, for example, if I did something wrong at work, said something wrong and offended a person or vice versa, he offended me and I feel ashamed, I realize that he was right, and I feel ashamed that he judged me in such a way, I feel ashamed, I feel scared. I was just getting caught up in that shame, it would catch up with me literally for days, or even weeks. Some things happened again a year ago, and I experience the same emotions, that is, as soon as I remember this situation, I am covered with this emotion of shame, fear, and I want to hide. So shame provokes you to hide in the first place.
Interviewer: Yes.
Informant: For me. Fear is a concomitant, I think, because shame and fear, well, shame is probably an emotion that you realize that you are justifiably ashamed, probably, that is certain moral norms that you have violated, so you are ashamed. And fear is a slightly different emotion, it happens whether you've done something bad or not.
Interviewer: But what are the consequences of violating these moral principles? Like you don't go to jail, but what happens?
Informant: Well you will be judged, you will not be perceived the way you would like to be perceived by people, your environment, for example, the same colleagues at work. A person is self-loving and proud, he will think: "Aha, so they condemned me and thus, well, undermined the authority. So you realize that people are judging you, laughing at you or something, I think so.
Interviewer: And is this destruction of social relations always, is this consequence always negative in the long term?
Informant: No. I understand that there is an expression in the Bible that "everything works out for the good for the loving God", and in my life, analyzing global situations from above and having lived some certain things in my life, milestones, I saw that having made this or that choice, having destroyed something, having left somewhere, for example, having changed even my job, initially I didn't want to lose it, I didn't want to leave this situation. I was comfortable there, it was good for me, and suddenly it all broke, destroyed, I think ah how bad, ah how sad, but having experienced all this and looking back, I realize that I gained much more. That is, I have morally matured, I have experienced some things, I realized that I will know in the next situation what to do and how to act, how to perceive. And globally I gained more, i.e. I, for example, found myself in another job, which now suits me better or at that time suited me better than what I had before. Even though initially it was just the collapse of my whole life, everything, everything is very bad there, I mean I realize that everything ends well anyway.
Interviewer: And that's great. Everything that is not done is for the best, that's basically the end of the interview, that was the last question. Thank you very much for agreeing, it's very important for me, you told me a lot of things, a lot of examples from your life, thank you very much.
Informant: You're welcome.
Interviewer: Really, it's very valuable.
Informant: It's not difficult for me, I liked it.
Interviewer: Good afternoon, my name is Angelina. I am studying at the Higher School of Economics, and as part of my thesis I am conducting a research, the purpose of which is to study social expectations in Russia. I will ask you some questions about your life, and ask you to answer them as sincerely as possible and, if possible, share your experience, the experience of your acquaintances, if you have not had such experience. Naturally, I guarantee you complete anonymity. All your answers will be used in a general way. The time will be about 50 minutes to an hour. Are you ready?
Informant: Ready.
Interviewer: Then, at the beginning a little bit of brief information about you. I've already introduced myself. Tell me, what is your name? How old are you? Where do you work? What do you do in your free time?
Informant: Irina Mikhailovna Davidenko. 44 full years old. I work in "Rosenergoatom Concern" as a chief specialist. Hobbies: sports, traveling.
Interviewer: Excellent. Do you travel often? 
Informant: As much as possible. Weekends, holidays - on vacation. 
Interviewer: I see. Then, at the beginning... You can take whatever pen you like, I brought it with me. I'll ask you to draw a diagram of your life like this: in the middle will be your age. Then your past up to 10 years. And then your future. And I will ask you to draw some successes in your life, maybe some downfalls, situations that you consider the most significant for you. 
Informant: Draw a graph? 
Interviewer: Yes, in the form of a line. Draw a graph of your life.
Informant: Okay. We'll draw here then - 20, 15, 25.
Interviewer: About the future - what do you think? What do you hope for? Maybe some plans you have.
Informant: Well, it is somehow difficult to depict it in a graph. Everything is somehow flat for me. I can't say that. I probably won't go any further. It's very difficult somehow. It's all kind of flat. Let's say enrollment, well, I don't have such, how can I say it, I don't get shaky. Everything is standard: enrollment, study, work, marriage, move, work again. Somehow it just goes on and on. In its own way. 
Interviewer: And how did you perceive these events? As positive or negative?
Informant: Well, naturally, if you achieve something, it's positive. Because the job I wanted. Studying where I wanted to study. Moving here, again, for me it was desirable. So there was no rejection. Here work - also it turns out, unambiguously, normal, I was here. And then, well, somehow straight. An even straight line. Standard.
Interviewer: Draw what you think. Maybe something higher will be, do you want to achieve more? 
Informant: Sure. Now we'll bring it like this, and like this. 
Interviewer: Great. So there weren't any significant negative life events. 
Informant: How to say, it's standard there. The death of loved ones. There weren't any disappointments like that in life. The only thing, maybe, is the death of loved ones. But that is, let's say, expected. Who was not born will not die. You have to be philosophical about it. Come - gone. Younger - older. But that's life. You have to get along with it somehow, with the idea that if a person is born, he can die. Parents, grandparents. To this... 
Interviewer: Then, about the future. Why do you think things will get better in the future? Why do you want things to be better and better?
Informant: And that's probably human nature. Human beings strive for things to be better. To develop at work, let's say. To develop at home. That's why there is some career growth, to develop further, to improve further. Not only externally, but also internally. Again, the same sports, the same traveling. Career, success. It gives more opportunities, and material, and stability is formed. It all gives an impetus to development. To learn more, to see more, to see more. It only gets better from here. 
Interviewer: That's great. Do you think other people will have a similar lineage to yours? 
Informant: I never think about how other people's line is. Because everyone has to make himself as a person. Of course, everyone thinks in the long run that further will be better. Naturally. Those people who are in my environment, I will make efforts, I will help, I will advise. Somewhere materially, somewhere morally, so that they also strive for something and achieve something. And outsiders should be confident in their own strength and strive for something. The main thing is that there is a desire. If someone doesn't want to, I can't help, I can't tell, I can't explain. 
Interviewer: In general, that's very good. Then, I will move on to specific questions. I will divide them into several different blocks. At the beginning, let's go back a bit further - your youth. I want to ask you about education and career. What do you think a successful career is all about? 
Informant: A successful career. First of all, in order to make it a successful career, you need to do what you want to do, what you like, what you can realize yourself in. What you feel you have potential in. That's the only way. If you studied to be a builder, and then you will work as a carpenter, a salesman, what kind of career can there be? You can somehow transcend yourself and follow a new path, and achieve something in life. And so... A successful career is to turn a hobby into a job. Then, you have the motivation, you have the desire. You can even get two or three educations, and in some of them find yourself. Get what you want to do.
Interviewer: Yeah, that would be ideal. To turn a hobby into a paycheck. There is a lot of controversy about what is more important for people: a favorite job or a high salary? What do you think is more valued in Russia?
Informant: What is valued in Russia? Salary. Look around you, how many people just serve their time at work in order to earn some money. Not to exist, but to live decently and support their families. To give children education, to develop themselves, food, clothes - these are natural human needs. No one will ever give up these things in favor of some favorite business. There are such cases. If you know that your spouse is the main provider in the family, and he allows you to do your favorite thing. Then you can afford a hobby, do it as you can, when you can. And if you have to support a family, there is not much choice. You go where there is some income. Where there is a decent wage. You have free time for hobbies, nothing more. 
Interviewer: And as far as you are concerned, how did it work out in your life? Were you able to combine your favorite job and get the desired salary? 
Informant: I had my favorite job before I moved to Moscow. I was doing what I wanted to do. I was developing, I also had a kind of successful career in it. But then, again, due to the move to Moscow, I had to reconsider my views, and I naturally began to work where I was paid a decent salary. What I was doing before, here, not like here, in the regions, it was difficult to get a decent salary. Practically impossible. Where I worked before, we had a specialized departmental institution, where we had our own bonuses, our own additional payments. The salary there was really decent. Here it was exactly the same: favorite, desired and paid. After the move, it became clear that this would no longer be the case here. I had to change. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that some people work hard, try hard, but their professional career doesn't work out in the end?
Informant: There are some. A lot of them.
Interviewer: Why does that happen? 
Informant: It's very difficult to explain here why this happens. Even to look, many people who work here, they are all educated, they all have higher education, and many have more than one. But having occupied some cell in the staff schedule, they are like horses dragging, dragging, dragging, and maybe he is in some way smarter, more restrained, more intelligent, more punctual than his manager, but he has no opportunity to pass there. Somebody is humble, somebody can't. And in the third option, he is simply not given such an opportunity to make himself known and say: "Let me be the head." Others are already claiming this place. Well, nobody has canceled nepotism in our country. No one has canceled some traditions, let's say, there is a family business, where everything is also passed on by inheritance and so on. So, it's all obvious. Take the same employees who work for us. There are a lot of outsourcers who work in the regions, do the same work, but their salaries are 2-3 times lower than here in Moscow. And they can't do anything because the ceiling is so high there. 
Interviewer: Do you think this norm can be applied to all companies, to all organizations, or are you only talking about yours? 
Informant: I'm talking about the general. This is a general picture. Look at any organization, it's the same there. There are many cases of employees when children graduate from higher education, graduate with a red diploma, and they can't get a job that would be worthy of their knowledge. Because someone studies just to get a diploma, because mom, dad, uncle are already ready places. A child just needs to get a diploma. Accordingly, by these already what remains. And it turns out that they were not very successful - 3, 4, 2 like that. It turns out that they still hire those former students who studied on excellent and above that. So it turns out that there is an unfair distribution. 
Interviewer: What do you think it means to get a good education?
Informant: A good education is to get a profession that is in demand. One that is in demand at the moment and you will be a specialist in it. That is, you are not just a multifaceted person, but you are a specialist in your field. So that you can then apply it in practice. It is not that they poured water on you, you got 4-5, but you cannot put it into practice. You seem to know it, but you can't do it. He knows the theory, but he can't do it in practice. 
Interviewer: So you need skills? 
Informant: Both skills and the ability to use them. 
Interviewer: And what do you think are the most in-demand specialties in Russia? 
Informant: Right now, at the moment - IT-technologies, banking, construction, maybe. Trade is also quite good. Insurance is now... Robotics, space - all these new technologies. All the new ones that appear, they are immediately in demand. 
Interviewer: Do you think that some people might want to retrain when they find out that now, for example, IT is very much in demand. They kind of want to change their profession. If there are such people, what do you think their motivation is? Are they really interested in this field or do they want a higher salary? 
Informant: The thing is, even an example. We had a girl working for us who was also involved in the operation of nuclear power plants. Being on maternity leave, she started to develop more or less, to look at something, to search for something. She became very interested in programming. Being on maternity leave, she finished some courses, took some training, participated in seminars. Here she realized that her career ceiling, a certain position, as a specialist she has to go to nuclear power plants, to talk to masters, as a rule, they are men. She is a skinny girl, no one perceives her. And as she said, I can't be realized in this as a specialist. Nobody perceives me until we talk about work for 2-3 hours, they see that I understand that I understand and ask tricky questions. Then they start to communicate with me in a different way. When in the process of conversation it turns out that I own the topic, own the information. So she decided that it would probably be right to try something new. So she tried programming. She went to several companies for interviews, did several projects. And even, she says, it turned out that even the salary there is acceptably higher. And it turned out that, again, she got carried away, combined all this, and something new, and increased her income. She's now, with pleasure, she's been practicing for six months, she's found herself. 
Interviewer: That's great that she was able to combine, just what you were talking about in the beginning. What were your initial plans for education, future profession? When you went to school for example, what did you want to become? 
Informant: Yes, a little bit of everything. First this, then this, then that. It's natural. Just like starting from kindergarten, everyone asks, what do you want to be? Everything. I wanted to be everything. And then it turned out that there were plans to go international. But somehow it happened that I went as a child psychologist. 
Interviewer: And how did it come about that you are now working here? 
Informant: Working there, I received a decent salary, and my career was developing in a decent way. But having moved to Moscow, you realize that the salary of a psychologist here leaves much to be desired. So I had to retrain. Well, men are the same as children, only they have more expensive toys. The staff here is mostly male, so I found an approach to each one, to talk to each one. You can always get into the essence of the work, if you want to. Let the cost of some time, but it is still possible. You can learn everything. 
Interviewer: Are you comfortable here now? 
Informant: Quite. Yes. Because I say, I am developing, always something new, I am doing something, something else is emerging. Here, we are now designing the construction of an AC in Belarus. Every time something new appears, some new moments. Everything is interesting. 
Interviewer: Did your parents have any expectations about your future professional development? 
Informant: They did not have any doubts at all. We didn't even have any opinions about where I would get higher education. It was not even discussed. I will have a higher education.
Interviewer: And about the specialty? 
Informant: Specialty? No, they gave me a lot of leeway on what you want, what you want to do. Nobody imposed, nobody tried to convince me of anything. This is my life, my future. You're in the right. As my parents always told me: "We are not eternal, so no matter how things turn out, now you, let's say, have failed, we can help you in some way. But in the future, sorry, we can't help you. So you have to calculate where, what, how - by yourself". Well, the best university for a girl is to get married successfully. That's the best university. 
Interviewer: Yeah. Now about that. How did your parents envision your future life? 
Informant: They had a good idea. 
Interviewer: And if you put it in a nutshell: get married, have children.... 
Informant: This is a standard, let's say, everyday situation. Get married, get married, get a good job. Well, and then it's up to you. My parents are very democratic. Never interfered in my choice, in any way. As I decided for myself. The bumps you take are your bumps. So everything else. They could just discreetly suggest things. Unobtrusively give you an example, and you just thought: I guess something is so necessary, yes. That's what I was looking at. 
Interviewer: Did they try to guide you in any indirect way? 
Informant: No. 
Interviewer: Gently?
Informant: No. Just by myself. My parents never knew about my problems anywhere in school or in the institute. They had no idea how to do homework with me. Never. I had everything clear. I did lessons, sports, circles were generally available in any variant then. I tried everything I could. Even playing musical instruments. I had it all. And nobody told me, like some people, you have to finish music school and that's it. No, I went for a year. I realize I don't like it. And that's it. Now I may regret it, I come to a hotel somewhere on vacation. There's a piano in the lobby, a grand piano. You can imagine, you go into the hotel, you lift the lid, you play like Mozart. Wow. And then you realize I'd rather listen to other people play. I had everything. And embroidery, and knitting, and weaving with a salt shaker, and linen. And sports sections, and professional passion for sports - athletics. There was everything. Children were diversified in sports camps and everywhere, everywhere. 
Interviewer: That's right. I had the same thing myself. Did you have any specific plans for your future life or did you try to go with the flow? 
Informant: Specific plans... It is clear that with every step you overcame, let's say, I entered... I studied at school, naturally, there was a plan how to finish it. How many grades? 9-11. It's closer there, you realize that 9 - you're not limited. Because you have to go to some technical school, vocational school. It doesn't suit you. So, 11, because you want to get higher education. You entered, you get higher education, immediately you think: so, specialization, what is acceptable to me? What's a possibility right now? What are you going to take advantage of? What are the bonuses, let's say, from this? You get a higher education, while you're getting a higher education, you're already thinking of ways where you can work. So that the work is also appropriate. Once you get a job, you start to grow somehow. You start to look for yourself in career growth. How did I do it? I had a higher education, got a category - the first, then the second. Then, to go to the Academy under the President to study management. And then... But it wasn't meant to be. I got married. Went to Moscow. The academy was left without me. 
Interviewer: So not everything turned out as you had planned? 
Informant: Not that not everything. I don't think it was a bad period in my life. Why didn't it work out? I moved here. And here I have it, let's just say it's not worse. Yes, I may not have made it as a psychologist, as a manager in this field. But I felt myself here too... The opportunities are completely different. The environment is completely different. People, development, culture. If you live in a provincial city, let's say 150,000 people. You move to a metropolis of 20 million. So it can't be a disadvantage. I have no regrets. The fact that I left and it turned out this way, at the moment, I do not regret it, and I do not think that I will have to regret it later. Because everything is somehow quiet, calm. 
Interviewer: And currently, right now, do you feel completely free to make decisions? 
Informant: Of course. Completely. Even though I'm married. Yes. Absolutely. We can argue, we can each have an opinion. I can say this and he can say that. So I go this way and he goes that way. If we don't find some kind of compromise for the two of us, then he goes this way and I go that way. That's it.
Interviewer: So you are not limited by anything, are you? 
Informant: No. Nothing and nothing. Well, what I am limited by, if I say so, materially. No, I don't have any prohibitions, no restrictions. I am free to dispose of what I have. Absolutely. I'm accountable to no one. I'm not accountable for anything. If I need to go to the bathhouse with my girlfriends, I go to the bathhouse. If I need to go to a spa, a hair salon, I go wherever I need to go. We decided to go on vacation there, so we go on vacation there. So there are no restrictions like that. I can limit myself, my conscience will be aroused: perhaps I need to stop a little. After all, it will be too much for me. I should think about my neighbor. 
Interviewer: Do you think this kind of family is common in Russia?
Informant: No - no. It's an exception to the rule. 
Interviewer: And what, in general, is a typical family in Russia? Can you describe it? 
Informant: A typical family? Well, it's, you know, like a man is possessive. Not necessarily even a man. Somebody in the family is necessarily a possessor. There are very few relationships like that - equal relationships. Very rare. All the same, even if I have some freedom, I still feel some responsibility. It's not that I want to fly away, that's all. I didn't come home for the night, I went here and there. You still feel responsible. You realize that people worry about you, that they value you, that they need you. So there is still a zone of responsibility. And so, in fact, women are often restricted in material things. On the other hand, restricted because there is nowhere to separate, very terrible in material limits. Even if he wanted to, he can't because there's nothing to get out of. Can't afford it. And so, as a rule, men are possessive. I have examples of colleagues here - it is unequivocal. "I'll go, and you can't. You're with kids. You have children."
Interviewer: So even in Moscow, the capital city, this happens?
Informant: Yes, quite often. Very often.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you for telling us your opinion. What do you think, in what cases, under what conditions should a person work hardest, try hardest? 
Informant: In my opinion, I don't like the word "should". I don't owe anybody anything. Absolutely. 
Interviewer: Wants to really labor. 
Informant: He really wants to work. For the most part, something allows you to labor, to develop, anything - it's a crush. That of any person. For the sake of someone, in order to make someone pleasant, to do something for their loved ones, to thank their parents for their participation in their fate, life - only like that. But just like that - it's unlikely. There must be some very good incentive. 
Interviewer: Can it be related to the same work, for example, when a person is in love with his work? Or is it more about personal relationships? 
Informant: I think it's mostly personal relationships. A person is able to accomplish feats, to roll mountains for the sake of his relatives. For work, there are, of course, such variants, that he got carried away, he liked it. He goes on and on. Or sees the positive example of the surrounding someone. Very also contributes that: "How is it so? He can, why can't I? I'll try too, I can do it too." It can still motivate. Maybe, well, some critical situations in the family - illness of loved ones - can also motivate to these all kinds of actions. And so, falling in love is the strongest incentive to achieve something, to show. Or once - resentment towards someone, also gives a very good incentive to show that you did not perceive me, you did not make any calculations on me, but I can and will achieve. I will do it - also very such.... 
Interviewer: And if you imagine a situation that a person is engaged in a business that he doesn't like. What should be the reward, its, maybe, size, so that the person would be motivated and work more? 
Informant: You can't call it numbers - its size. Because the human nature is like this: what is the inflow, is the outflow. And every day, if you get 100 thousand today, in six months it will seem to you that it is not enough. It is not enough, because after six months you get used to it, you start to use - buy more expensive products, you start to allow somewhere to go to a restaurant, to the movies more often. Buy more comfortable clothes expensive and so on. It takes six months to get there. It's a psychological component. In six months it will seem to you that 100 thousand is not enough for you. You will want to go on vacation not to a three-star hotel, but to a 5-star hotel. And to go not to Turkey, not to Egypt, but to fly somewhere on the Cote d'Azur and so on. This is a human component, it is the same for everyone. It seems to me that this consumer attitude in this section is the most.... It's impossible to give a specific figure, because what comes in is what goes out. 
Interviewer: Do the efforts you make always lead to the desired result? 
Informant: Not always. Not always. 
Interviewer: What sometimes doesn't work? What sometimes gets in the way? 
Informant: It's hard to say. There are a number of factors. Maybe you were doing something and it has lost its relevance. You strived for something, achieved something, but again, some nuances come out: someone else has taken this place. Such situations often happen when someone has overtaken you, someone has beaten you.... There are always a lot of examples, when a person was planned for a certain position, and then someone new appears. And it turns out that you are already out of business, and someone else is offered the position. It happens all the time. 
Interviewer: What do you rely on when making difficult decisions? 
Informant: Difficult decisions? An anecdote on this topic: 
A married couple has been together for over 50 years. 75 years - diamond wedding anniversary. The correspondent comes: "How did you do it? Well done. How did you manage to live together like this?" The man answers: "In our family everything was simple. Simple issues were always solved by my wife, I dealt only with complex situations." "Well, tell me, what were the simplest issues your wife had to deal with?" "Where to buy an apartment? Where to go on vacation? Where will the children study?" "Okay. Good. And the difficult ones?" "You know, there were no difficult ones." 
There. You tend to rely on what you can do. No matter how hard you try, no matter how you avoid this topic, you still rely on what you can count on. It can be both materially and morally. You have to be sure that if you do it, if you do something, you will be supported, you will be understood, you will not go to the cut. If it is, really, what a difficult decision. If it's simple, everyday, well, you get a bump, one or two - it's no big deal, you start from scratch. Of course, in serious nuances, a single decision is already taken, let's say, maybe not even mine alone. Here, of course, there is already a discussion, collegial, maybe ask someone for help. Support. To get someone's support, that if something happens, can I count on you? There's a lot of factors here too. 
Interviewer: Who can an adult ask for help in difficult situations or maybe advice, direction? 
Informant: The same adult. And I don't even exclude the situation where you can even turn to your children. You don't have to think that you are dumber or wiser than them, that you have more experience in life and so on. After all, different generations, different times, different opportunities, thinking is different completely. Sometimes, children can offer very interesting solutions that don't fit, maybe, into their parents' concepts. But they work, they work. I use them in my work. I've never treated kids like kids. I've always talked to them as equals. I promise you, you promise me. Okay. We're doing this, have you kept your promise? No, then I'm not keeping mine. Are we right? No shushu. Absolutely. Clean straight, properly constructed sentences, phrases, communication. As equals. That's the only way he'll accept you. And if "sushi-pushi" these, he will show cunning and look for ways to manipulate you. Then they see all your weaknesses. 
Interviewer: Yeah, kids are tricky. 
Informant: We were like that ourselves. 
Interviewer: "He who doesn't take risks doesn't drink champagne." Do you agree with this statement? 
Informant: It depends. There are justified risks, and there are risks that are just stupidity. Let's say, jumping off a tower or jumping off realizing how it may end is foolishness. They're different things. You can, let's say, take the risk of going to learn something new. You can make some investments, start building something, buy something for yourself, for your family - to increase your wealth. You can take a risk to go for some operation for health, for good purposes, I consider this risk justified. In this case I can say, who does not take risks does not drink champagne. But if you just have a second or third drink and decide to climb down from the roof and hang down on the parapet, that's not the risk, that's not the champagne. 
Interviewer: When the risk is justified from the point of view of the person himself, what can still prevent him from realizing what he has planned? For example, he wants to have an operation and he has already decided to do it. What, who can prevent that? 
Informant: Surgery, okay. Let's say a girl has decided to have breast enlargement surgery or liposuction and so on. Who can forbid her? Maybe, most likely, what? Maybe some negative example from her environment, from her close ones. It is clear, they can prohibit, blocking the material component, to pay for this operation, can contribute to this. Well, and maybe her own sanity. She woke up in the morning and decided she didn't need it. Probably the inner circle, most likely. People who know you. Those who care about you, who are trying to get it through to you that you don't need it or want it, but not right now. Or reconsider, think about it, maybe there's some chance. Let's try it another way. So it's most likely people who care about you, who are close to you, who know you and know how you can be influenced, how you can be affected. If it makes any sense, change it so that a person doesn't make that kind of decision for themselves. That's kind of the way it is. 
Interviewer: And if a person decided to take a risk, should they seek advice from their inner circle?
Informant: Not always. It's not always worth listening to, because close people, let's say, you know, there's a situation now where you can only consult, consult with you. Because now there is such a period of time, it becomes very offensive and scary when envy, greed and so on prevail over everyone. When you ask the advice of those around you, and they see your perspective, not everyone will sincerely say what they think. How he sees it all. If he feels that you will have some superiority over him, it won't always be an adequate assessment. And not always will his arguments be convincing enough. Kind of will lean in his side to prevent a person from developing his capabilities and abilities. It's not uncommon. 
Interviewer: Did you have such situations? 
Informant: It's even sad that now close people - relatives, second - third circle of relatives, they behave exactly the same way towards your relatives. It's all over the place. That's why everyone who is trying to achieve something, to take a risk, to move to a new position - everyone hides it from each other, and they tell each other later, when it's done. We also had a girl who left. She kept silent for a long time, then she said she was leaving. She texted everyone that I was leaving. She left, yes, she was offered a good salary, a position. She was there for a month. And she went nowhere because she didn't get along with her manager. And she just went nowhere after a month. Two, three, four months of depression, practically a neurosis clinic. And as luck would have it, we got her back. Which is lucky, because you don't always get her back. When you leave, you leave. Somehow it worked out that she was brought back. I mean, she decided that if I said I was leaving for a better place, everyone would be jealous. Maybe someone else would jump in. You know, put a stick in the wheel, show up faster and say I'm better. I mean, of course, I can't say that everybody is like that. There are people who are decent, with ambitions, also self-sufficient. But there are also people who hide everything. They try to do everything quietly and calmly, and already put before the fact. Also, not only in the collective, but very often at home. To, again, to prove something to someone, that you doubted me, and I could, I did. Experience comes in many forms, both positive and negative. 
As I have always said: who will not betray - it's mom. It is only somewhere to have a conversation, maybe some doubts, unobtrusively ask some opinion of her. Sometimes, it happens, it shoots out, and you realize that a step back should be taken or 5 forward. Sometimes, that helps. Step back, wait a while, that's it, you see things start to come together again, and you go forward again. It helps. Mom would never betray. 
Interviewer: Let's move on to the last set of questions. Do you follow generally accepted norms of behavior? 
Informant: You know what I can say about it? I will live the way you are embarrassed to live. Yes. 
Interviewer: Epigraph. 
Informant: Yes. I will live the way you are embarrassed. It turns out that these norms of behavior, just like the commandments in the Bible, for some people are acceptable, for some people certain norms are not acceptable. Yes, I'm there, excuse me, I won't defecate in the street - that's generally accepted and you follow them. And there are some other norms, someone is trying to impose on someone that it should be like this. I think-- Well, you do. You have the right to do that to your family, to your loved ones. You have a right to do that, and I don't like it. I want to do things differently. You spend money on expensive shoes, you have a lot of clothes, and I always say, "You can't take your pockets to the other side." You can't take it there, if you have an opportunity, you have to live. Because the second - the third - it is not there. A lot of people condemn it. I want to drink wine - I will drink it. No one will forbid me. I want to go there - I will go. I want to go to a spa, a bath - I will go. For some people it's wild: Here, you spend so much money. You spend so much time there. Here, you help him, why do you give him? And here, you gave... If I give a gift, it is to give pleasure. I don't just give a vase, they gave it to me 5 years ago, I gave it to him. No, I don't do that. It's not my family's custom. If I invite guests, it's from the heart. I'll never count with anyone. I go to a restaurant: "Oh, are you crazy?" And I want to - I'll go. So these rules, let's say, for some people are acceptable, for some people are not acceptable. That's why I say: I'll live my life the way you're embarrassed. Allow myself sports, pleasures, help my - who I think I should. I believe the purpose of all life: I would rather be helped by me than have them help me. I can, I will help, morally - financially, in whatever way is convenient. Support in whatever way is needed. But I stick to the fact that I will help myself, but not me. It keeps me afloat somehow. 
Interviewer: Why do you think other people don't do what they want to do? Why are they maybe afraid to break those norms? 
Informant: Because everything is laid down in the family. Everything comes from the family. No matter what they say: school, society, institute - everything is wrong. All models of behavior are laid down in the family. How dad behaves, how mom behaves, how they treat you. If my parents were and are very democratic, then, accordingly, I have the same calm attitude to all the vicissitudes of life. We never had any prohibitions in the family. You want a drink? Go and buy a bottle of wine with friends, here you have dinner, sit, drink, talk. But like mom says: don't go around the corner to sniff your sleeve. Prohibitions breed desire. And that desire is defiant. Insolence, defiance. You want to smoke? Smoke at home. Don't. I didn't want to. I have two older brothers, I grew up with them in their company, socializing with guys older than me. My mom always baked pies, guitars. The guys came to me later. I went to study at the institute, I had no desire to drink, smoke, go out with guys. How? I don't want to. They all came from the provinces - they're into all sorts of things. In the first year, 25-30% went on maternity leave. I don't want to, nobody forbade it at home. Why should I adjust myself to someone else's opinion, to someone else's norms? I want - I'll go. I don't want to - I won't do it. And in general, prohibitions have a very strong influence. Yes, there are some bans that are justified. Smoking in a public place - yes, it is justified, because if you want to harm your health - harm it alone. But other norms, purely personal, someone else's, imposed on someone else - this generates opposition. And there is a struggle of interests, who is who? So... 
Interviewer: Have you ever had such situations in your life when you thought: "What will others think about me?"
Informant: No. Even, again, family, the wisdom of generations. My grandmother always said that what people will think and say, it's accepted. It's the dead that are not talked about. The living will always be talked about - that's first of all. And secondly, if they're talking about you, it means you're ahead of them. If they're talking about you, that means you're better than them. You have to make sure you're even better. It will be very sad for them, they will be badly influenced by it. Either they will try to reach you, take your level and get closer to you, or it will be very painful for them and it will be very sad for them. 
Interviewer: And in general, if we're talking about most - average people, thoughts about what they're going to think of me, they can have a big impact on decision making? 
Informant: Absolutely. Quite a bit. Because the opinion of society for some people... Well, like for me, it's not an indicator. I don't perceive it, because my upbringing and my awareness of reality, I won't go to defecate in the street, I understand that it's indecent, whatever they say. At the same time, for some people the opinion of society is very important, what will the neighbor think, in what dress I went out? What will my girlfriend think? I wore the wrong thing, I did the wrong thing. This is also very common, very common. What do you advise them? You either have it or you don't. If there is a person around who will say that this is wrong, and you should move away from it, let's say, and physically prove it with some examples. Look, here she was saying, what changed from that? It didn't change anything. What difference does it make? This is your life, you live in your world, in your circle. If it doesn't happen, then the person will go into the other world with it - he will always look back on someone else's opinion. This is an indicator of a very complex person. Very much complex, uncomfortable, not feeling himself in this environment, not perceiving himself in this circle. That's why he listens to all outside opinions, it's all childish complexes. The influence of the environment, the influence of the family. Sometimes, I hear girls talking to children: "Here, why can't you? Tanya got an A yesterday, she's a better student than you." This is already psychologically overwhelming, it's not even necessarily a child. Any other person. You formulate the wrong motivation for the child. You need to say, "Tanya got an A yesterday, well, you can do it, you can do better than her." This is a completely different motivation and gives a foundation for the future. And if you always say that someone is better, someone is prettier, it suppresses the will and desire. Again, you listen to the opinion of others. 
Interviewer: What do you think is the difference between shame and guilt? 
Informant: Shame and guilt? Again, these are common attitudes - shame and guilt. I feel ashamed very rarely, but guilty more often. 
Interviewer: Have you ever had times when you couldn't sleep for a long time because you felt guilty? 
Informant: No. Most likely, I couldn't sleep because there was some important event coming up and you were going over it in your head all the time. And the shame and the guilt - I don't know. I don't know, maybe it's wrong, but I have that.... 
Interviewer: You said you feel guilt more often. 
Informant: If I have, let's say, I always say, it doesn't matter, family, close relatives, friends - you have to talk to each other. If I realize that I am at fault, so that I can sleep peacefully, it doesn't matter, sometimes with heat, say something, sometimes recklessly, I don't hesitate to come up and say I'm sorry, I was wrong. Absolutely. Or to say you were wrong, why did you do that? I didn't like that. That offended me. I don't drop insults, I don't put them in a jar. If I didn't like something or did something wrong, I say so right away. Let's say that I don't have any superiority over a person, I can admit my mistake. So, to sleep peacefully, I will come up and say that I was wrong, I'm sorry. We hugged either let not in person to say, even just on the phone. It's always just a text, a call. It is always easier than in verbal contact to recognize and say that I was wrong, looking in the eyes. That's why I don't hold grudges. I say it right away. That's why I don't work out with guilt, staying awake because of it. I can stay awake the night before something happens. And everything else, doesn't matter to me. 
Interviewer: What do you think a person should be ashamed of doing or even thinking? 
Informant: What kind of deeds? I guess, if it, let's say, it causes someone not just inconvenience, but a certain damage, harm. That's right. Hitting a woman in the face - it can be like humiliation of human dignity, humiliation in public, insult. That's what it is for the most part. Or inflicting physical injury. Everything else in this life, except death, is fixable. Only if you can do some specific damage to someone. Again, some sort of cost of upbringing. Parents may be ashamed of their son's vocabulary towards strangers. But, again, it carries some moral suffering, some damage to his reputation, to his health. So... Otherwise, I don't see any reason. 
Interviewer: Thank you very much. You've said a lot of interesting things. In fact, it's the first time I've met a person who has such a free, versatile way of thinking. 
Informant: I always say what I think and what I see. A lot of people don't like that, as far as I know. 
Interviewer: I liked it very much. 
Informant: Because you and I just chatted and went our separate ways. And the people you're around, it's you know, it's like dripping. "Here, she's always looking, she's always ... She's got a dress, she's got this, she's got that, she's got that." And some people don't like that. 
Interviewer: Good afternoon, my name is Angelina. I am a student at the Higher School of Economics, and as part of my thesis I am conducting a research project aimed at studying social expectations in Russia. Thank you for agreeing to participate in this interview. In the course of the interview I will ask you questions to which I ask you to answer honestly and, most importantly, in as much detail as possible. There are no right or wrong answers because I am interested in your experience and your opinion. Naturally, I guarantee you complete anonymity. The duration of the interview will be about 50 minutes, maybe a little more. Are you ready?
Informant: Yes.
Interviewer: Then tell us a little bit about yourself. I've already introduced myself. My name is Angelina. Can you please tell me your name? How old are you? Maybe some hobbies, hobbies? Where do you work? 
Informant: My name is Sergei Fedorushchenko. I am 52 years old. My first occupation was studying at school. Then I studied at the technical college of automobile road. I received my first secondary - technical education during the USSR in Ukraine, the city of Kharkov. Then I was drafted into the armed forces of the Soviet Union. Served first in the armed forces of the USSR, then in the armed forces of the Russian Federation. As a result, 21 years - an officer, major of the reserve. Having resigned, he joined the Federal Customs Service. He worked there for 2 years as a chief customs inspector. Then I went to work in the joint-stock company Rosenergoatom, where I currently work. This is the 14th year of my work there. My position is deputy department head. Briefly, my labor path. 
Interviewer: That's very cool. Do you have any hobbies in your free time? What do you like to do? 
Informant: I have many hobbies. As such, I can't name one thing I'm particularly passionate about. But there is, for example, driving a car as a man is interesting. I am interested in earthwork somewhere in the dacha, growing something. But it's not really a hobby. I like to listen to music sometimes. But both retro and modern music. I can listen to classics, but I'm not a fan. I love the exact science of statistics. I like it a lot. I memorize numbers, I memorize telephones. Military theme - birth dates of great generals, scientists. That's interesting to me. These are my hobbies - hobbies. 
Interviewer: Great. You have a lot of hobbies. Then, the first task is to draw your life line in the form of a segment with all the successes and failures that you consider the most significant. 
Informant: From 0 to today?
Interviewer: Let's say from 10 years to as many years as you can think of. Imagine to the future. It turns out, from your age in the middle to 10 years would be your past. You'll be able to visualize your successes, your failures. And as for the future, your hopes, your plans, how you think things will go. 
Informant: In this connection, I will not put my age after 52 then. I want to live a long life. For the future the line will go with the dream of a beautiful future. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Informant: How much time do I have to sketch? 
Interviewer: As much as you want. As your thought process goes. What you remember, you remember. You don't have to have a clear line to draw. What dates do you think are important. 
Informant: Uh-huh. So that I don't get confused, I'll put them in right away. Right. Well, and between them I'll put some more. That's me now the basic ones. Since I was 10 years old. Shall I explain? That's my age. 
Interviewer: Yes, preferably. 
Informant: At the age of 12 I finished school. It was a good event. I finished school with only A's and a certificate of merit. At the age of 15 I entered the technical school without exams, by interview. I studied there until I was 19. Those were the first good years of college. There's nothing bad about it. Next, I was drafted into the army. At the age of 27, I had a son. 
Interviewer: And that was the most joyful event? 
Informant: Yes. At the age of 34 I had a complicated surgery. Honestly, there was a serious question about my health. Next, it was normal. At 37, my father died. That's a setback. At 40, I got out of the Army. Worked there, and now I'm so even in my job. 
Interviewer: I see. When you joined the Army at 19, how did those around you feel about that event? Were they happy for you? 
Informant: Yes. At that time it was also that if a guy didn't serve in the army it was considered a bad, let's call it, example. A weighty argument for not serving in the army was the state of health. As I see it. For me to shirk was unacceptable. With pleasure, if it will be surprising to today's youth, I went to serve in the army with great pleasure. From compulsory service, remaining on special conscription, I served 21 years... Further, I have such a moment. In detail, I served 12 years as an officer. And finally, at the age of 40, I left the army. 
Interviewer: I want to ask you why you think that the birth of your son is the biggest, the best moment in your life? 
Informant: I have two big great memories. One, he was long awaited. For 6 years he was waited for. And related to the same thing, he's a continuation of the lineage - my family name. My father's grandfather was really looking forward to having a grandchild. Because I have an older sister, she already has a different surname, although there are grandchildren. And here - the continuer of the family name. This is the main thing. Related to this, alas, grandfather was gone. First I had a major surgery, then my grandfather was gone. The recession is connected with that. After that, everything is more or less normal. Normal work went on and that's it. 
Interviewer: Do you think other people have a life line similar to yours? 
Informant: I think there are a lot of similar lines. As our Oleg Gazmanov sings, I was born in the USSR, and back then it wasn't that everything was formulaic - life was like that. Almost everyone did not try to do as someone, but such a life that there were uniform rules, uniform habits, upbringing, ideology was one. And people lived a life that was happy that there was a normal income, there was a normal job that provided for the family. And in reverse: I, working at this job, supported the life of the country. Then the USSR collapsed. The Russian Federation was formed - the main one, where I lived. There was a period of perestroika, then the collapse. Many people's lives went downhill then. For me, everything was connected with stress. Nervous situation both in the service, and in the world, and so on. It all added up to one thing. Well, and I think that's how about 70 to 80 percent of the country lived. If I can put it that way. I was thinking about that earlier. Practically the whole country lived like that. A small part of the country lived peacefully. I can't say that anybody lived very quietly. It was that kind of time. 
Interviewer: And as for the future, do you think other people also think positively about the future? 
Informant: The future? Looking at today, at our life - my generation, older generation, yes, we are used to living a stable life. To get used to this kind of life. We quickly get used to everything. Although, many people, too, when new times came, reorganized themselves from one party to another and so on. Having the same thinking with absolutely others, they immediately changed it. I call them "opportunists". I'm not condemning them, I'm just calling them that. And for the future, as it is now, I think that there are a lot of intelligent young people, literate, who strive for a good future. But, unfortunately, the state does not have time to fully cover the education of young people. It does not have time to occupy them with something useful. Therefore, some of our young people are not involved and do not even strive for something, have bad habits and so on. In our time it was somewhere, but it was a minuscule amount. I still see Russia as a great country in the future, a strong country. But for this to happen, of course, the welfare of the people must be much better. The people should have more faith in their government and country. To be more prosperous. 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for sharing. You have told everything in great detail. Now I would like to ask you more specific questions, a little bit away from the life line. What do you think a successful career is all about? 
Informant: Any person or specifically mine? 
Interviewer: Can you tell me first about the general opinion, what it means in Russia, and then whether it applies to you. 
Informant: I think so, that career depends, first of all.... In the whole business the main criterion was desire. Everything depends on desire. It depends on how a person starts his studies, what path he chooses, starting from the school bench, then the student bench and so on. Everything should be to his liking, not to be imposed on him: you should be like this and that's all. It has to come from the person himself. After desire comes good knowledge. After knowledge - good education and experience is gained. Experience is introduced both for working on your own and if you will be entrusted to manage a certain team and so on. First a small one, then a bigger one. It also depends on the skillful management of the team that one should never (my opinion) force people to work from under a stick. People should willingly do their work, and that the work was to their liking. At this time it is necessary to find an approach to everyone. Show by example and demand from people what is written in their duties. This is my understanding of how things should be. From this, of course, the management, seeing how a subordinate or smaller management works, promotes a smaller manager. If there is no normal interaction with subordinates, there will be no normal career for the manager. 
Interviewer: And do people often find what they really want to do? 
Informant: I think that, as a rule, yes. But there are exceptions when a person is forced to go against his will to the same study, to the same job that one does not want to do. But it is necessary to do in order to feed the family, to have a normal existence, and, so, let's say, to make some sacrifices in order to live more normally. Without the desire to work there. 
Interviewer: So it's forced. And what do you think is more valuable in Russia: a high salary or a favorite, interesting job? 
Informant: To be honest, I would say that I would combine the two. Maybe not exactly 50/50. But I would say that both a high salary - 60-65 percent - and a favorite job. Because it can be different, of course, but it shouldn't be. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that even though some people try very hard and work very hard, their professional destiny doesn't cliff? 
Informant: Yes, that happens a lot. It depends on what? It depends on the fact that a person tries and works hard, but careless managers promote their own people, who are more necessary for them. And they ignore hard-working subordinates on purpose. This is called nepotism, hairy hand and so on Unfortunately, it is not good for the overall work. Sometimes even more harm. Because those unprofessional promoted workers are more spoiling the performance of the team and so on. It affects the quality of work. God forbid this production, it can lead to big, heavy consequences. I believe that this should not be the case. Everyone should be a professional in his place. Then we will have... Even, to give an example, if a driver drives a bus without desire, he will be late, he will be out of schedule, he will drive you uncomfortably, and so on. People who drive to work with some desire will have their moods ruined. It's a chain. 
Interviewer: Do you think specifically your job is what you originally aspired to? 
Informant: Yes. I'm going to answer that without hesitation. Because I've been practically 30 years in the job that I perform. Reached enough experience in that direction and I go to work with a desire. 
Interviewer: That's great. So you don't want to change anything? 
Informant: No. 
Interviewer: What does it mean to get a good education? Same as career, only now about education. 
Informant: I think that to get a good education is an education that, back to that word, you go to comprehend it and learn with pleasure. When there are good teachers, a high enough level of teaching, I am familiar with such moments - I have encountered them. Even if a university or school is not considered elite, they teach a good enough level of knowledge. If there is a desire to learn, there will be knowledge. Even if the teaching does not give something, the student himself can finish learning somewhere, take additional literature. In my time it was like that too. We found it in the library, took it, read it, teachers gave us extracurricular reading and so on. 
Interviewer: And what do you think is more important in education: to get specific skills for work or intellectual development? 
Informant: I'm not going to be snarky, but I would say one with the other has to be. There's no such thing as a person being smart and their hands don't work to do something physical - there's no benefit here. If he wants to do something physically, but he doesn't know how to do it, he doesn't know how to grind a part, he doesn't know what the dimensions should be. It has to go in parallel, together. Learning and practice live together. 
Interviewer: How does it work out in reality? Maybe you noticed something. 
Informant: In reality? Yesterday I heard something in passing on TV, some movie was on. In reality it turns out that a person comes to work and they say: "You are old. We can't hire you." They don't look at the fact that they have education. And at the same time, a young man comes, his age is not great, he has no experience, and they hire him. It is not a good thing that a young person will work, do the job that an older person would do, because he has no experience. He will mess up something somewhere. 
Interviewer: And what do you think are the more attractive specialties in Russia today? 
Informant: Today the specialties, I think so, are economists, logistics, notice I'm not calling them working specialties, but they are. I mean, not laborers, like before, in the factory, the same engineer. Not now, no. Lawyers. I would also call - law enforcement, you can't discount it. They are in demand now. 
Interviewer: Do you think people should retrain, change their qualifications to get into prestigious professions? 
Informant: To some extent, yes. There are cases when some professions become obsolete and so on New professions are coming. Robotization, digitalization, and so on Old professions become not quite necessary and in demand somewhere, and a person is still at a normal age, he or she has to retrain, retrain, retrain. Taking with him the experience of what he worked with, to implement it in new technologies. There is such a thing. 
Interviewer: Does that apply to you specifically? 
Informant: We also have such moments at work, yes. I have just mentioned to you both digitalization and automation of work. How can I tell you, we are workers on the paper front, so called, but the automation of our work is already in full swing. 
Interviewer: Let's go back a little bit, did your parents have any expectations about your studies and work? 
Informant: They did. When I was at school, I wanted to go to a university - a technical school related to motor transport. I had desires. They supported me in every possible way. They saw me in the image of an engineer - a technical worker. It turned out to be almost like that, I got a little bit sidetracked by a more serious question. 
Interviewer: They somehow explicitly expressed their expectations: I want you to become an engineer. 
Informant: They didn't impose on me. More supportive. They didn't impose. Go wherever you want to go. Go to study.
Interviewer: I see. Did your parents have any expectations about how your life would turn out in general? 
Informant: I can't speak for them. But they said that there should be a good family, grandchildren, a job, a profession. 
Interviewer: At that time you were not restricted in your freedom to make decisions about your life?
Informant: No. 
Interviewer: So your parents gave you freedom?
Informant: Yes. They traveled with me when I entered technical school. I went to the army on my own, of course. I was of age. 
Interviewer: Did you have to lie sometimes in order not to let down your family's expectations?
Informant: So the fear that I got a low grade and lie to them? Interviewee: Yeah, no. I was honest and frank about what was there. We had a rural school and everybody knew the teachers. And the teachers talked to the parents. And the teachers knew my learning capabilities, and my parents knew. I can't lie, because it would have been known immediately. No, I don't remember that. Well, I came: yes, I got a "C" today. I didn't quite understand something. But if I didn't, it wasn't my fault. No, I didn't do that. 
Interviewer: Did you ever feel pressured by your parents? Interviewer: At the time.
Informant: I was brought up harshly. 
Interviewer: How did that manifest itself? 
Informant: I had it like that, that my responsibilities were to study, help around the house and things like that. I had it like this. If I didn't do something, they could punish me. My upbringing was like that.
Interviewer: I see. Did it change as you got older? Did your blood pressure decrease somehow or did it increase? 
Informant: No. When I became a student, an adult, I was already independent. When I lived in a dormitory, I was practically doing everything myself - eating, cooking and so on. I was already taking care of myself, ironing myself, there was no pressure, of course. 
Interviewer: Would you like your parents to understand something about you that they didn't understand until now? 
Informant: At this age, practically, I'm not saying that my career is in decline, no, I won't say that. I will naturally listen to my mother. I don't have a father anymore. I listen to my mom, but she says: "I don't know what to advise you. She was brought up and studied at that time. Now, what I do, she practically doesn't know. And advice on life? Well, she may suggest something, but to insist, no, there is no such thing. It's getting old. I mean, I'm old. Yes, I'm her child, but I'm a big, bright kid. 
Interviewer: What were your initial plans and desires for your future life? 
Informant: Practically, when I joined the army, I after a year of service with a little bit, and I made this decision. The decision to stay to serve in the army, and it was my decisive decision. To stay in the army for a certain number of years. Almost to the military pension. That was my decision. 
Interviewer: Did everything work out the way you planned? If you look back in retrospect. 
Informant: Would I like to start something again? 
Interviewer: Yes. Change something somewhere. 
Informant: Small moments. Small things. But to drastically, no. 
Interviewer: Okay. Let's come back to the present now. Do you feel free to make decisions? 
Informant: In relation to what? 
Interviewer: Well, something you really want to do and you realize that you can't. 
Informant: Yes you know, honestly, I haven't thought about it. I, again, I'm not saying that life is routine. It's an antiquated word. Well, it's kind of like I'm so dull, right? Everything seems to be working out. I haven't thought about changing anything drastically yet. I'm being honest. 
Interviewer: Okay. Let's talk a little bit about motivation. In what cases or under what conditions do you think a person really wants to work? 
Informant: When he is well off, first of all. He is provided, he is worthy of remuneration for his work, he is provided with conditions, security of working conditions. For me, the notion of over some, as there is a notion in a small stratum of our world population, in order to live - I have a small request, I will call it that. A small request - I call it now: a normal job, a normal salary. And how to say what a normal salary is? It should be enough to provide for myself and my family, and I should have a small reserve somewhere. To dress, to put on shoes, to eat, and what else is needed in addition? 
Interviewer: Do you set yourself any impossible goals?
Informant: To be elegant, for example. I don't need that. I don't know what it's for. The recording goes let it go and you use it somewhere. I heard a proverb a long time ago, and I like it: the coffin has no pockets. You can't take anything in there. It's a sad proverb, but still. A man needs everything he wants in this world, but what's extra? I don't know. For the children, yes. You have to provide, but beyond that, where? I don't know. Well, that's just my opinion. I don't impose it. 
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. Often, proverbs describe a person's worldview. It's a very useful thing. Do efforts always lead to the desired result? Not necessarily about work.
Informant: Practically yes. I am an obligatory, persistent person and I am used to achieving my goals. Not by any means, by normal means. Civilized ways, I would say. Again, you have to set yourself an achievable goal. A super goal is if you strive for something, and if you do not fulfill it, you will be offended. For what? Normal goals - I want to buy a cottage, I want a car. I want a boat, if I am a fisherman. I mean normal goals, such moments that I know they will be achievable. Yeah, some of them are not that easy. You'll have to work hard somewhere, lose something, take a lot of time to achieve the goal. But that goal has to be achieved. 
Interviewer: How do you realize what the criteria of this goal are, that they are achievable and normal? 
Informant: You have to balance your possibilities with your desires. 
Interviewer: And what do you base your goals on? 
Informant: My experience, first of all. Surroundings are one thing. But my experience: can I do it? If I turn to someone for help, that's one thing. And for example, if I set this goal to do it myself, yes, this is experience, skill, finances and the commensurability of all this must be calculated. If I want it, can I count on it myself? That's the criteria, I don't know any other criteria. 
Interviewer: Similar enough question, what do you base your decisions on? 
Informant: Again, on my experience, on my skill, on the support of my subordinates (it is very important). Because if there is something somewhere, I expect help. And, how to say, I must have confidence that I will do it. Without it, too, there is no result. So, in that way. 
Interviewer: Did you have situations of difficult Choices? And how did you make a decision in such a situation? Maybe when you were at a crossroads? 
Informant: There were. I named one of them to you, at the age of 19, when I decided to stay in the army or go to the civilian labor force. That was my first big decision. 
Interviewer: How did you make that decision then? 
Informant: I weighed all the pros and cons. It was Soviet times then. It was still that time. There was confidence in the future. That it was a constant and so on. Service was a job, the pay was decent in the army. That's one thing. And the second moment, there, serving in the army, I agreed to move from the category of warrant officers to the category of officers. I thought about it from my side. And the third thing related to the army is the discharge. I am 40 years old, I don't see a career at the top. The salary is not very good. An offer of a civilian job, salary and so on. Then, I had already exhausted my potential in the army. 
Interviewer: When you made the decision to stay in the army and not go to the civilian labor force, you were quite young. Did someone help you to make the right decision? 
Informant: Yes, my parents. I went to them for advice when I was on vacation, my brother, my sister. 
Interviewer: Maybe your friends, the people around you, then, what did you do? 
Informant: And there were friends. They were agitating me to stay. A little bit older they were, and, with whom I served, and, with whom I was friends. Some of them I'm still friends with. One of them is gone now who practically talked me into it. Not that he talked me into it, but he was the main colleague who gave me the idea. We'll teach you, don't worry. I had very strong support, strong elbows on both sides. I was very excited to start the service. It was a decision at a young age, but it was a mature decision. 
Interviewer: "He who doesn't take risks doesn't drink champagne." Do you agree with this statement and does it apply to you? 
Informant: I have such moments. I am not that reckless, I take risks. But it happens. I am not afraid to make hasty decisions. I am not afraid, in those places where others are timid, I calmly make a decision. Somewhere it is necessary to go to the management, to the bosses. Some people say: "Oh, I won't go. He is angry today." And I: I have to, so I have to. What kind of risk do I take, for example? When driving a car and making decisions on the road, there is enough risk. Of course, not to take it to the point of danger. To goof around somewhere, there's still risk in that. Where else? In some kind of work, mastering something. That's a risk too. I won't use a power saw because it's dangerous. What's the difference? I'll work with it, but carefully. In such small things, but there are risks too. It can turn from a small risk into a big risk.
Interviewer: I was very interested. You talked about the risk in a work situation: to go to the boss or not to go, to express or not to express your opinion. What are the barriers to taking that risk? What stops people? 
Informant: Barriers? What stops people is the fear of the high superior. He will fire me, and why? First of all, you need to know your legal protection. That is, you need to know the labor code, your labor obligations. I always say that to myself and my subordinates. What's so difficult? "There, he's angry." Just like you. So what if he's angry? So, I'm sorry, why are you yelling at me and so on? There's an authority on them, too. It's not just like that. I had the same in the army, I used to go to higher generals without any fear to report mail, information. I always said: "What's the big deal? I came in, as it should be, introduced myself, reported. Should you get a punch in the forehead for that? No. And if you reported some bad information, you didn't write it. You read it, you're allowed to go, that's it. What's the big deal? Same as in the civilian life here. What's the big deal? 
Interviewer: Let's move on to the last block of questions. Do you follow the generally accepted norms of behavior and have you ever violated them? 
Informant: I do. And violate them? Sometimes. I stepped on someone's foot, figuratively speaking. Although I always try to stand close to the wall when I get on the escalator, for example, so as not to disturb anyone. If I'm carrying a bag, I put it away so that it doesn't get in the way. It's an army habit, when soldiers carry something, there has to be a line. It always affects me. I think it's a good thing. If people have to cross the road at a crosswalk and on a green light, then so it should be. And I, standing on Vykhino, I see how they run the red light, and the minibuses almost pass on the ass. We drivers are fined for this, but why aren't pedestrians fined for it? I am more exposed to the generally accepted norms, I try to observe them. We didn't invent them, but we have to follow them. There are rules of behavior everywhere and on transport and so on.
Interviewer: In what cases, under what conditions is it scary for a person not to follow the norms? 
Informant: Is it scary not to follow the norms? It seems to me, after all, when doing dangerous work. If you don't do what you are supposed to do according to the instructions and so on, you can endanger yourself and others. I think that's where it comes from. Yes, it's a failure to meet standards. I think it goes to the level of a crime. It's already a criminal offense. 
Interviewer: And if there's fear on the part of the boss? That you're going to be fired. 
Informant: That's it. That's where it comes from. If you've done something wrong, you're afraid you'll be fired for it. Fear. 
Interviewer: Are the consequences of breaking norms always negative in the long run? That is, they seem negative in the beginning, but later on?
Informant: Unfortunately, apart from the regulator of these relationships, the management and so on, a lot of people make a mess and they don't get anything for it. You know? It can be offensive. God forbid, you knocked something wrong somewhere or did something wrong, it was seen here and so on. And others. You almost punctured a tire in your car or did something, damaged, let's call it, a pillar or something else, they have nothing for it. You come to the idea that everyone should be equal in work and in punishment. In responsibility, first of all, let's call it that. In punishment for those misdemeanors, mischiefs and so on Here. 
Interviewer: Have you ever had a situation in your life when you thought about what people around you would think of you? 
Informant: I have. In work, in socializing. Even informal communication. Even a simple situation, when at the same corporate party, if you go out with someone to dance, what will these people think? Even that small thing, it would seem. At work, if you speak out in some meeting, and somehow abruptly, what will the management, the people think? It happens in many situations. 
Interviewer: Does it affect your decision making? 
Informant: Sometimes, yes. Like you said just now, what will people think of you? They look at you obliquely, it means you've done something wrong. Then you start to doubt. I'll do this, and then they'll judge me. I've had those moments. Then you change your mind, I won't do it. Yes, there were such moments. 
Interviewer: Have you had situations where you couldn't stop feeling guilty? A lot of people can't sleep, for example. 
Informant: There have been. About work. 
Interviewer: About work mostly? 
Informant: Yeah, yeah. I'm the kind of person who's a very moody person about work. I keep in my head, even on weekends, that I need something next week so I don't forget. It's not like in my head, I have it all written down. I worry a little bit in advance that it has to be done faithfully, with quality. There are moments like that. 
Interviewer: How can this affect a person's life? 
Informant: You can't dwell on it, I'll put it this way, then it won't affect a person's life. A little bit of letting go of the whole situation yourself. Because, in fact, it can affect the person just to dwell on it, and there will be nervous system and behavior different. It can get to the point of marasmus. 
Interviewer: In what situations does one feel shame and in what situations does one feel guilty? What do you think is the difference between these feelings and emotions? 
Informant: Shame, I think, is when you, knowing you should have done it, you didn't. And you could have done it, it was in your power to do it. That's one point. The second point is that shame is when you promised something and you didn't fulfill it. That's shame, too. And guilt is when you could have prevented something, it was in your power, and you didn't do it. That's guilt. So the line is kind of thin, but it's there. You know, the word shame is always synonymous with the word conscience. Because shame is the fact that a person has a conscience. You like proverbs, I'll tell you something else: conscience is a brand thing, you have to keep it in the closet. In the sense that people have forgotten about it. A person should have a conscience if he has set someone up, not helped them, and so on. And guilt is when something is done before your eyes and you can't prevent it. 
Interviewer: What kind of actions or even thoughts do you think a person should be ashamed of? 
Informant: For the unpreventable and for what you didn't do, promised, should have done, didn't do in time. Shame because of what you didn't do. Promised but didn't do it. 
Interviewer: So the person has to remember that?
Informant: Of course, and he should be ashamed. Like I always say also: don't give out promissory notes. That's just like that. 
Interviewer: Okay, that was basically the last question of the interview. Thank you very much for agreeing, telling a lot of interesting examples from your life and sharing difficult life situations. Thank you very much. It is important and valuable for me.
Informant: You are welcome. It was a pleasure to talk to you. 
Interviewer: Good afternoon, my name is Angelina. I am studying at the Higher School of Economics, and as part of my thesis I am conducting a study on social expectations in Russia. Thank you for agreeing to participate in this interview. In the course of the interview I will ask you questions to which I ask you to answer honestly and, most importantly, in as much detail as possible. There are no right or wrong answers, because I am interested in your experience and your opinion. Naturally, I guarantee you complete anonymity. The duration of the interview will be about 50 minutes, maybe a little more. Are you ready?
Informant: Yes.
Interviewer: Then tell us a little bit about yourself. I've already introduced myself. My name is Angelina. Can you please tell me your name? How old are you? Maybe some hobbies, hobbies? Where do you work? 
Informant: My name is Sergei Fedorushchenko. I am 52 years old. My first occupation was studying at school. Then I studied at the technical college of automobile road. I received my first secondary - technical education during the USSR in Ukraine, the city of Kharkov. Then I was drafted into the armed forces of the Soviet Union. Served first in the armed forces of the USSR, then in the armed forces of the Russian Federation. As a result, 21 years - an officer, major of the reserve. Having resigned, he joined the Federal Customs Service. He worked there for 2 years as a chief customs inspector. Then I went to work in the joint-stock company Rosenergoatom, where I currently work. This is the 14th year of my work there. My position is deputy department head. Briefly, my labor path. 
Interviewer: That's very cool. Do you have any hobbies in your free time? What do you like to do? 
Informant: I have many hobbies. As such, I can't name one thing I'm particularly passionate about. But there is, for example, driving a car as a man is interesting. I am interested in earthwork somewhere in the dacha, growing something. But it's not really a hobby. I like to listen to music sometimes. But both retro and modern music. I can listen to classics, but I'm not a fan. I love the exact science of statistics. I like it a lot. I memorize numbers, I memorize telephones. Military theme - birth dates of great generals, scientists. That's interesting to me. These are my hobbies - hobbies. 
Interviewer: Great. You have a lot of hobbies. Then, the first task is to draw your life line in the form of a segment with all the successes and failures that you consider the most significant. 
Informant: From 0 to today?
Interviewer: Let's say from 10 years to as many years as you can think of. Imagine to the future. It turns out, from your age in the middle to 10 years would be your past. You'll be able to visualize your successes, your failures. And as for the future, your hopes, your plans, how you think things will go. 
Informant: In this connection, I will not put my age after 52 then. I want to live a long life. For the future the line will go with the dream of a beautiful future. 
Interviewer: Okay. 
Informant: How much time do I have to sketch? 
Interviewer: As much as you want. As your thought process goes. What you remember, you remember. You don't have to have a clear line to draw. What dates do you think are important. 
Informant: Uh-huh. So that I don't get confused, I'll put them in right away. Right. Well, and between them I'll put some more. That's me now the basic ones. Since I was 10 years old. Shall I explain? That's my age. 
Interviewer: Yes, preferably. 
Informant: At the age of 12 I finished school. It was a good event. I finished school with only A's and a certificate of merit. At the age of 15 I entered the technical school without exams, by interview. I studied there until I was 19. Those were the first good years of college. There's nothing bad about it. Next, I was drafted into the army. At the age of 27, I had a son. 
Interviewer: And that was the most joyful event? 
Informant: Yes. At the age of 34 I had a complicated surgery. Honestly, there was a serious question about my health. Next, it was normal. At 37, my father died. That's a setback. At 40, I got out of the Army. Worked there, and now I'm so even in my job. 
Interviewer: I see. When you joined the Army at 19, how did those around you feel about that event? Were they happy for you? 
Informant: Yes. At that time it was also that if a guy didn't serve in the army it was considered a bad, let's call it, example. A weighty argument for not serving in the army was the state of health. As I see it. For me to shirk was unacceptable. With pleasure, if it will be surprising to today's youth, I went to serve in the army with great pleasure. From compulsory service, remaining on special conscription, I served 21 years... Further, I have such a moment. In detail, I served 12 years as an officer. And finally, at the age of 40, I left the army. 
Interviewer: I want to ask you why you think that the birth of your son is the biggest, the best moment in your life? 
Informant: I have two big great memories. One, he was long awaited. For 6 years he was waited for. And related to the same thing, he's a continuation of the lineage - my family name. My father's grandfather was really looking forward to having a grandchild. Because I have an older sister, she already has a different surname, although there are grandchildren. And here - the continuer of the family name. This is the main thing. Related to this, alas, grandfather was gone. First I had a major surgery, then my grandfather was gone. The recession is connected with that. After that, everything is more or less normal. Normal work went on and that's it. 
Interviewer: Do you think other people have a life line similar to yours? 
Informant: I think there are a lot of similar lines. As our Oleg Gazmanov sings, I was born in the USSR, and back then it wasn't that everything was formulaic - life was like that. Almost everyone did not try to do as someone, but such a life that there were uniform rules, uniform habits, upbringing, ideology was one. And people lived a life that was happy that there was a normal income, there was a normal job that provided for the family. And in reverse: I, working at this job, supported the life of the country. Then the USSR collapsed. The Russian Federation was formed - the main one, where I lived. There was a period of perestroika, then the collapse. Many people's lives went downhill then. For me, everything was connected with stress. Nervous situation both in the service, and in the world, and so on. It all added up to one thing. Well, and I think that's how about 70 to 80 percent of the country lived. If I can put it that way. I was thinking about that earlier. Practically the whole country lived like that. A small part of the country lived peacefully. I can't say that anybody lived very quietly. It was that kind of time. 
Interviewer: And as for the future, do you think other people also think positively about the future? 
Informant: The future? Looking at today, at our life - my generation, older generation, yes, we are used to living a stable life. To get used to this kind of life. We quickly get used to everything. Although, many people, too, when new times came, reorganized themselves from one party to another and so on. Having the same thinking with absolutely others, they immediately changed it. I call them "opportunists". I'm not condemning them, I'm just calling them that. And for the future, as it is now, I think that there are a lot of intelligent young people, literate, who strive for a good future. But, unfortunately, the state does not have time to fully cover the education of young people. It does not have time to occupy them with something useful. Therefore, some of our young people are not involved and do not even strive for something, have bad habits and so on. In our time it was somewhere, but it was a minuscule amount. I still see Russia as a great country in the future, a strong country. But for this to happen, of course, the welfare of the people must be much better. The people should have more faith in their government and country. To be more prosperous. 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for sharing. You have told everything in great detail. Now I would like to ask you more specific questions, a little bit away from the life line. What do you think a successful career is all about? 
Informant: Any person or specifically mine? 
Interviewer: Can you tell me first about the general opinion, what it means in Russia, and then whether it applies to you. 
Informant: I think so, that career depends, first of all.... In the whole business the main criterion was desire. Everything depends on desire. It depends on how a person starts his studies, what path he chooses, starting from the school bench, then the student bench and so on. Everything should be to his liking, not to be imposed on him: you should be like this and that's all. It has to come from the person himself. After desire comes good knowledge. After knowledge - good education and experience is gained. Experience is introduced both for working on your own and if you will be entrusted to manage a certain team and so on. First a small one, then a bigger one. It also depends on the skillful management of the team that one should never (my opinion) force people to work from under a stick. People should willingly do their work, and that the work was to their liking. At this time it is necessary to find an approach to everyone. Show by example and demand from people what is written in their duties. This is my understanding of how things should be. From this, of course, the management, seeing how a subordinate or smaller management works, promotes a smaller manager. If there is no normal interaction with subordinates, there will be no normal career for the manager. 
Interviewer: And do people often find what they really want to do? 
Informant: I think that, as a rule, yes. But there are exceptions when a person is forced to go against his will to the same study, to the same job that one does not want to do. But it is necessary to do in order to feed the family, to have a normal existence, and, so, let's say, to make some sacrifices in order to live more normally. Without the desire to work there. 
Interviewer: So it's forced. And what do you think is more valuable in Russia: a high salary or a favorite, interesting job? 
Informant: To be honest, I would say that I would combine the two. Maybe not exactly 50/50. But I would say that both a high salary - 60-65 percent - and a favorite job. Because it can be different, of course, but it shouldn't be. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that even though some people try very hard and work very hard, their professional destiny doesn't cliff? 
Informant: Yes, that happens a lot. It depends on what? It depends on the fact that a person tries and works hard, but careless managers promote their own people, who are more necessary for them. And they ignore hard-working subordinates on purpose. This is called nepotism, hairy hand and so on Unfortunately, it is not good for the overall work. Sometimes even more harm. Because those unprofessional promoted workers are more spoiling the performance of the team and so on. It affects the quality of work. God forbid this production, it can lead to big, heavy consequences. I believe that this should not be the case. Everyone should be a professional in his place. Then we will have... Even, to give an example, if a driver drives a bus without desire, he will be late, he will be out of schedule, he will drive you uncomfortably, and so on. People who drive to work with some desire will have their moods ruined. It's a chain. 
Interviewer: Do you think specifically your job is what you originally aspired to? 
Informant: Yes. I'm going to answer that without hesitation. Because I've been practically 30 years in the job that I perform. Reached enough experience in that direction and I go to work with a desire. 
Interviewer: That's great. So you don't want to change anything? 
Informant: No. 
Interviewer: What does it mean to get a good education? Same as career, only now about education. 
Informant: I think that to get a good education is an education that, back to that word, you go to comprehend it and learn with pleasure. When there are good teachers, a high enough level of teaching, I am familiar with such moments - I have encountered them. Even if a university or school is not considered elite, they teach a good enough level of knowledge. If there is a desire to learn, there will be knowledge. Even if the teaching does not give something, the student himself can finish learning somewhere, take additional literature. In my time it was like that too. We found it in the library, took it, read it, teachers gave us extracurricular reading and so on. 
Interviewer: And what do you think is more important in education: to get specific skills for work or intellectual development? 
Informant: I'm not going to be snarky, but I would say one with the other has to be. There's no such thing as a person being smart and their hands don't work to do something physical - there's no benefit here. If he wants to do something physically, but he doesn't know how to do it, he doesn't know how to grind a part, he doesn't know what the dimensions should be. It has to go in parallel, together. Learning and practice live together. 
Interviewer: How does it work out in reality? Maybe you noticed something. 
Informant: In reality? Yesterday I heard something in passing on TV, some movie was on. In reality it turns out that a person comes to work and they say: "You are old. We can't hire you." They don't look at the fact that they have education. And at the same time, a young man comes, his age is not great, he has no experience, and they hire him. It is not a good thing that a young person will work, do the job that an older person would do, because he has no experience. He will mess up something somewhere. 
Interviewer: And what do you think are the more attractive specialties in Russia today? 
Informant: Today the specialties, I think so, are economists, logistics, notice I'm not calling them working specialties, but they are. I mean, not laborers, like before, in the factory, the same engineer. Not now, no. Lawyers. I would also call - law enforcement, you can't discount it. They are in demand now. 
Interviewer: Do you think people should retrain, change their qualifications to get into prestigious professions? 
Informant: To some extent, yes. There are cases when some professions become obsolete and so on New professions are coming. Robotization, digitalization, and so on Old professions become not quite necessary and in demand somewhere, and a person is still at a normal age, he or she has to retrain, retrain, retrain. Taking with him the experience of what he worked with, to implement it in new technologies. There is such a thing. 
Interviewer: Does that apply to you specifically? 
Informant: We also have such moments at work, yes. I have just mentioned to you both digitalization and automation of work. How can I tell you, we are workers on the paper front, so called, but the automation of our work is already in full swing. 
Interviewer: Let's go back a little bit, did your parents have any expectations about your studies and work? 
Informant: They did. When I was at school, I wanted to go to a university - a technical school related to motor transport. I had desires. They supported me in every possible way. They saw me in the image of an engineer - a technical worker. It turned out to be almost like that, I got a little bit sidetracked by a more serious question. 
Interviewer: They somehow explicitly expressed their expectations: I want you to become an engineer. 
Informant: They didn't impose on me. More supportive. They didn't impose. Go wherever you want to go. Go to study.
Interviewer: I see. Did your parents have any expectations about how your life would turn out in general? 
Informant: I can't speak for them. But they said that there should be a good family, grandchildren, a job, a profession. 
Interviewer: At that time you were not restricted in your freedom to make decisions about your life?
Informant: No. 
Interviewer: So your parents gave you freedom?
Informant: Yes. They traveled with me when I entered technical school. I went to the army on my own, of course. I was of age. 
Interviewer: Did you have to lie sometimes in order not to let down your family's expectations?
Informant: So the fear that I got a low grade and lie to them? Interviewee: Yeah, no. I was honest and frank about what was there. We had a rural school and everybody knew the teachers. And the teachers talked to the parents. And the teachers knew my learning capabilities, and my parents knew. I can't lie, because it would have been known immediately. No, I don't remember that. Well, I came: yes, I got a "C" today. I didn't quite understand something. But if I didn't, it wasn't my fault. No, I didn't do that. 
Interviewer: Did you ever feel pressured by your parents? Interviewer: At the time.
Informant: I was brought up harshly. 
Interviewer: How did that manifest itself? 
Informant: I had it like that, that my responsibilities were to study, help around the house and things like that. I had it like this. If I didn't do something, they could punish me. My upbringing was like that.
Interviewer: I see. Did it change as you got older? Did your blood pressure decrease somehow or did it increase? 
Informant: No. When I became a student, an adult, I was already independent. When I lived in a dormitory, I was practically doing everything myself - eating, cooking and so on. I was already taking care of myself, ironing myself, there was no pressure, of course. 
Interviewer: Would you like your parents to understand something about you that they didn't understand until now? 
Informant: At this age, practically, I'm not saying that my career is in decline, no, I won't say that. I will naturally listen to my mother. I don't have a father anymore. I listen to my mom, but she says: "I don't know what to advise you. She was brought up and studied at that time. Now, what I do, she practically doesn't know. And advice on life? Well, she may suggest something, but to insist, no, there is no such thing. It's getting old. I mean, I'm old. Yes, I'm her child, but I'm a big, bright kid. 
Interviewer: What were your initial plans and desires for your future life? 
Informant: Practically, when I joined the army, I after a year of service with a little bit, and I made this decision. The decision to stay to serve in the army, and it was my decisive decision. To stay in the army for a certain number of years. Almost to the military pension. That was my decision. 
Interviewer: Did everything work out the way you planned? If you look back in retrospect. 
Informant: Would I like to start something again? 
Interviewer: Yes. Change something somewhere. 
Informant: Small moments. Small things. But to drastically, no. 
Interviewer: Okay. Let's come back to the present now. Do you feel free to make decisions? 
Informant: In relation to what? 
Interviewer: Well, something you really want to do and you realize that you can't. 
Informant: Yes you know, honestly, I haven't thought about it. I, again, I'm not saying that life is routine. It's an antiquated word. Well, it's kind of like I'm so dull, right? Everything seems to be working out. I haven't thought about changing anything drastically yet. I'm being honest. 
Interviewer: Okay. Let's talk a little bit about motivation. In what cases or under what conditions do you think a person really wants to work? 
Informant: When he is well off, first of all. He is provided, he is worthy of remuneration for his work, he is provided with conditions, security of working conditions. For me, the notion of over some, as there is a notion in a small stratum of our world population, in order to live - I have a small request, I will call it that. A small request - I call it now: a normal job, a normal salary. And how to say what a normal salary is? It should be enough to provide for myself and my family, and I should have a small reserve somewhere. To dress, to put on shoes, to eat, and what else is needed in addition? 
Interviewer: Do you set yourself any impossible goals?
Informant: To be elegant, for example. I don't need that. I don't know what it's for. The recording goes let it go and you use it somewhere. I heard a proverb a long time ago, and I like it: the coffin has no pockets. You can't take anything in there. It's a sad proverb, but still. A man needs everything he wants in this world, but what's extra? I don't know. For the children, yes. You have to provide, but beyond that, where? I don't know. Well, that's just my opinion. I don't impose it. 
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. Often, proverbs describe a person's worldview. It's a very useful thing. Do efforts always lead to the desired result? Not necessarily about work.
Informant: Practically yes. I am an obligatory, persistent person and I am used to achieving my goals. Not by any means, by normal means. Civilized ways, I would say. Again, you have to set yourself an achievable goal. A super goal is if you strive for something, and if you do not fulfill it, you will be offended. For what? Normal goals - I want to buy a cottage, I want a car. I want a boat, if I am a fisherman. I mean normal goals, such moments that I know they will be achievable. Yeah, some of them are not that easy. You'll have to work hard somewhere, lose something, take a lot of time to achieve the goal. But that goal has to be achieved. 
Interviewer: How do you realize what the criteria of this goal are, that they are achievable and normal? 
Informant: You have to balance your possibilities with your desires. 
Interviewer: And what do you base your goals on? 
Informant: My experience, first of all. Surroundings are one thing. But my experience: can I do it? If I turn to someone for help, that's one thing. And for example, if I set this goal to do it myself, yes, this is experience, skill, finances and the commensurability of all this must be calculated. If I want it, can I count on it myself? That's the criteria, I don't know any other criteria. 
Interviewer: Similar enough question, what do you base your decisions on? 
Informant: Again, on my experience, on my skill, on the support of my subordinates (it is very important). Because if there is something somewhere, I expect help. And, how to say, I must have confidence that I will do it. Without it, too, there is no result. So, in that way. 
Interviewer: Did you have situations of difficult Choices? And how did you make a decision in such a situation? Maybe when you were at a crossroads? 
Informant: There were. I named one of them to you, at the age of 19, when I decided to stay in the army or go to the civilian labor force. That was my first big decision. 
Interviewer: How did you make that decision then? 
Informant: I weighed all the pros and cons. It was Soviet times then. It was still that time. There was confidence in the future. That it was a constant and so on. Service was a job, the pay was decent in the army. That's one thing. And the second moment, there, serving in the army, I agreed to move from the category of warrant officers to the category of officers. I thought about it from my side. And the third thing related to the army is the discharge. I am 40 years old, I don't see a career at the top. The salary is not very good. An offer of a civilian job, salary and so on. Then, I had already exhausted my potential in the army. 
Interviewer: When you made the decision to stay in the army and not go to the civilian labor force, you were quite young. Did someone help you to make the right decision? 
Informant: Yes, my parents. I went to them for advice when I was on vacation, my brother, my sister. 
Interviewer: Maybe your friends, the people around you, then, what did you do? 
Informant: And there were friends. They were agitating me to stay. A little bit older they were, and, with whom I served, and, with whom I was friends. Some of them I'm still friends with. One of them is gone now who practically talked me into it. Not that he talked me into it, but he was the main colleague who gave me the idea. We'll teach you, don't worry. I had very strong support, strong elbows on both sides. I was very excited to start the service. It was a decision at a young age, but it was a mature decision. 
Interviewer: "He who doesn't take risks doesn't drink champagne." Do you agree with this statement and does it apply to you? 
Informant: I have such moments. I am not that reckless, I take risks. But it happens. I am not afraid to make hasty decisions. I am not afraid, in those places where others are timid, I calmly make a decision. Somewhere it is necessary to go to the management, to the bosses. Some people say: "Oh, I won't go. He is angry today." And I: I have to, so I have to. What kind of risk do I take, for example? When driving a car and making decisions on the road, there is enough risk. Of course, not to take it to the point of danger. To goof around somewhere, there's still risk in that. Where else? In some kind of work, mastering something. That's a risk too. I won't use a power saw because it's dangerous. What's the difference? I'll work with it, but carefully. In such small things, but there are risks too. It can turn from a small risk into a big risk.
Interviewer: I was very interested. You talked about the risk in a work situation: to go to the boss or not to go, to express or not to express your opinion. What are the barriers to taking that risk? What stops people? 
Informant: Barriers? What stops people is the fear of the high superior. He will fire me, and why? First of all, you need to know your legal protection. That is, you need to know the labor code, your labor obligations. I always say that to myself and my subordinates. What's so difficult? "There, he's angry." Just like you. So what if he's angry? So, I'm sorry, why are you yelling at me and so on? There's an authority on them, too. It's not just like that. I had the same in the army, I used to go to higher generals without any fear to report mail, information. I always said: "What's the big deal? I came in, as it should be, introduced myself, reported. Should you get a punch in the forehead for that? No. And if you reported some bad information, you didn't write it. You read it, you're allowed to go, that's it. What's the big deal? Same as in the civilian life here. What's the big deal? 
Interviewer: Let's move on to the last block of questions. Do you follow the generally accepted norms of behavior and have you ever violated them? 
Informant: I do. And violate them? Sometimes. I stepped on someone's foot, figuratively speaking. Although I always try to stand close to the wall when I get on the escalator, for example, so as not to disturb anyone. If I'm carrying a bag, I put it away so that it doesn't get in the way. It's an army habit, when soldiers carry something, there has to be a line. It always affects me. I think it's a good thing. If people have to cross the road at a crosswalk and on a green light, then so it should be. And I, standing on Vykhino, I see how they run the red light, and the minibuses almost pass on the ass. We drivers are fined for this, but why aren't pedestrians fined for it? I am more exposed to the generally accepted norms, I try to observe them. We didn't invent them, but we have to follow them. There are rules of behavior everywhere and on transport and so on.
Interviewer: In what cases, under what conditions is it scary for a person not to follow the norms? 
Informant: Is it scary not to follow the norms? It seems to me, after all, when doing dangerous work. If you don't do what you are supposed to do according to the instructions and so on, you can endanger yourself and others. I think that's where it comes from. Yes, it's a failure to meet standards. I think it goes to the level of a crime. It's already a criminal offense. 
Interviewer: And if there's fear on the part of the boss? That you're going to be fired. 
Informant: That's it. That's where it comes from. If you've done something wrong, you're afraid you'll be fired for it. Fear. 
Interviewer: Are the consequences of breaking norms always negative in the long run? That is, they seem negative in the beginning, but later on?
Informant: Unfortunately, apart from the regulator of these relationships, the management and so on, a lot of people make a mess and they don't get anything for it. You know? It can be offensive. God forbid, you knocked something wrong somewhere or did something wrong, it was seen here and so on. And others. You almost punctured a tire in your car or did something, damaged, let's call it, a pillar or something else, they have nothing for it. You come to the idea that everyone should be equal in work and in punishment. In responsibility, first of all, let's call it that. In punishment for those misdemeanors, mischiefs and so on Here. 
Interviewer: Have you ever had a situation in your life when you thought about what people around you would think of you? 
Informant: I have. In work, in socializing. Even informal communication. Even a simple situation, when at the same corporate party, if you go out with someone to dance, what will these people think? Even that small thing, it would seem. At work, if you speak out in some meeting, and somehow abruptly, what will the management, the people think? It happens in many situations. 
Interviewer: Does it affect your decision making? 
Informant: Sometimes, yes. Like you said just now, what will people think of you? They look at you obliquely, it means you've done something wrong. Then you start to doubt. I'll do this, and then they'll judge me. I've had those moments. Then you change your mind, I won't do it. Yes, there were such moments. 
Interviewer: Have you had situations where you couldn't stop feeling guilty? A lot of people can't sleep, for example. 
Informant: There have been. About work. 
Interviewer: About work mostly? 
Informant: Yeah, yeah. I'm the kind of person who's a very moody person about work. I keep in my head, even on weekends, that I need something next week so I don't forget. It's not like in my head, I have it all written down. I worry a little bit in advance that it has to be done faithfully, with quality. There are moments like that. 
Interviewer: How can this affect a person's life? 
Informant: You can't dwell on it, I'll put it this way, then it won't affect a person's life. A little bit of letting go of the whole situation yourself. Because, in fact, it can affect the person just to dwell on it, and there will be nervous system and behavior different. It can get to the point of marasmus. 
Interviewer: In what situations does one feel shame and in what situations does one feel guilty? What do you think is the difference between these feelings and emotions? 
Informant: Shame, I think, is when you, knowing you should have done it, you didn't. And you could have done it, it was in your power to do it. That's one point. The second point is that shame is when you promised something and you didn't fulfill it. That's shame, too. And guilt is when you could have prevented something, it was in your power, and you didn't do it. That's guilt. So the line is kind of thin, but it's there. You know, the word shame is always synonymous with the word conscience. Because shame is the fact that a person has a conscience. You like proverbs, I'll tell you something else: conscience is a brand thing, you have to keep it in the closet. In the sense that people have forgotten about it. A person should have a conscience if he has set someone up, not helped them, and so on. And guilt is when something is done before your eyes and you can't prevent it. 
Interviewer: What kind of actions or even thoughts do you think a person should be ashamed of? 
Informant: For the unpreventable and for what you didn't do, promised, should have done, didn't do in time. Shame because of what you didn't do. Promised but didn't do it. 
Interviewer: So the person has to remember that?
Informant: Of course, and he should be ashamed. Like I always say also: don't give out promissory notes. That's just like that. 
Interviewer: Okay, that was basically the last question of the interview. Thank you very much for agreeing, telling a lot of interesting examples from your life and sharing difficult life situations. Thank you very much. It is important and valuable for me.
Informant: You are welcome. It was a pleasure to talk to you. 
Interview7.wav
Interviewer: My name is Angelina. I study at the Higher School of Economics. And as part of my thesis I'm conducting a research that aims to study social norms and expectations in Russia. Thank you for once again agreeing to participate in this interview. I would very much ask you to answer as sincerely and honestly as possible. This is by no means a test. There are no right or wrong answers here, it is your opinion and your position that is most important to me. I guarantee you complete anonymity. All your answers will be used in a general way, no audio recording goes anywhere at all. This is a conversation that no one will ever hear. I will just make notes to myself during the conversation, write. The duration will be about 50-45 minutes, as it goes, it may be shorter.
Informant: Okay. 
Interviewer: Then briefly tell us a little bit about yourself first. I've already introduced myself. What's your name, how old are you, where do you work. And maybe you have some hobbies, hobbies. 
Informant: My name is Elvir. Two years, married. Two children. I work in the emergency service. Here, from hobbies - cars. What? Well, basically, cars, I like to play volleyball. I like tennis. I mean, sports. Basically sports in general. 
Interviewer: That's great.
Informant: So I'm into everything I can. 
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. Then the first question is probably the most difficult one at the beginning. If you think back to your whole life, from childhood to now, what do you think were your happiest, most important moments? And maybe the unhappiest, negative ones. Can you tell us? 
Informant: So, well, the happiest moments are naturally, well, kindergarten, naturally, I remember badly. Here, like any human being, in idea. Here, well the happiest moments - when I went to school, when I finished, naturally, to study. That is the first kiss, of course, the happiest moment. Later on, i.e. student life. It was a fairy tale in principle. The next step was, of course. I don't know, a lot of people say that, but in a good, let's say. a good fairy tale in my life was the service in the army. Then naturally... ah, well marriage, that's right. I was in the army, I got married a year before the army, then naturally I went into the army. And then the children were born. First a son, then a daughter three years later. That's the most, the most, the most, naturally. Then the purchase of housing.
Interviewer: And why is army service one of the happiest moments? 
Informant: Army service? Well, service in the army is, let's say, hardening. So I went to the army as a kid. And I came back already so, let's say, matured. Well, a man, so to speak. So I think that one of the good moments in my life was my military service. 
Interviewer: Did the people around you think the same thing? That it was an important moment in your life?
Informant: The people around you? Well, no. They didn't. I have... the thing is I went into the army and I had my son a month later. Yeah so I...like I have a very strong memory of the moment of the army just because of the son. Probably because of that. And I lived, let's say I served in the army knowing that I was going to have a son when I was a civilian. So here it was very strongly remembered. 
Interviewer: I see. And if we talk about some, maybe, important and good events for you. Were there any?
Informant: No, in my life I don't see one, not one, as they say, bad some kind of bad moment in my life. The only thing is that I have, let's say that I may have..... or rather it can't be, but it is - the loss of relatives. Let's just say from the negative moments in my life. 
Interviewer: I see. And do you think that's what you're describing now, right? These are the happy days of your life and the negative days at the same time. Do you think other people have, roughly similar descriptions of their lives, or maybe different?
Informant: I think that if a person knows what are, as they say, the happy moments of life and what are the negative moments, I think so - we probably have 90% agreement. 
Interviewer: So there is some general idea of what is a happy moment? 
Informant: Yes, yes, yes. Absolutely right. If a person understands that, then I think they would agree with me. 
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. I'm going to move on to more specific, narrower questions. What do you think a successful career is all about? Or a successful, ideal job? 
Informant: Okay. Well, a successful... well, in principle, any work should be, let's say, done with pleasure. That is, if a person works at a job he likes, if he does a job he likes, it means that he will reach the heights. That is, if he is engaged in his favorite work, then a person has a goal, a person has aspiration. To reach, let's say, the highest level. So he will, then rather he will naturally go uphill. 
Interviewer: And what do you think is more motivating in Russia exactly?
Informant: In Russia? 
Interviewer: Yes. Interesting, favorite job, field of activity or high salary? 
Informant: At the moment, probably, most likely, a high salary. I think so. 
Interviewer: Is it often or rarely that people can combine an interesting job and a good salary? 
Informant: Probably extremely rare, I think so. People even if, let's say, a janitor is offered, I don't know, well, roughly speaking, to go.... but, it's not for everyone, the highest amount, then the janitor will also go to do it. Because, well, in Russia there is, let's say, such a tendency that in Russia, well, money rules today. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that despite the fact that some people work hard and try hard, their professional destiny does not work out? And why, if so. 
Informant: Of course, of course. That's absolutely true. That's 100%, let's put it that way. 
Interviewer: And why is that? What could be the reasons? What's going wrong? 
Informant: Right. Again, please repeat the question again. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that despite the fact that some people work hard and try hard, their professional destiny doesn't work out. Well, for example, a person in the office, at work or whatever, overworks a lot. Really both at home and at work constantly thinks about work, tries, tries to show high results. But he does not get any remuneration for it. As if nobody needs it in the end. 
Informant: I see. Well, yes, the question is clear. We have such, let's say, a problem in Russia. Everywhere with good positions and good salaries, relatives, let's say, work everywhere. Relatives, their own people. That is, not for merit, but exactly as they say, as they say, how to say it correctly, in the common people - it is all done through a furry hand. And those who are really engaged in their favorite business, who want to earn money, work, work, work. As they say, he doesn't earn shit, let's put it that way. 
Interviewer: Ah, what do you think....
Informant: That's why the anecdote.
Interviewer: Yeah. Is your job specifically what you were originally aiming for? 
Informant: Yes, absolutely. I mean, to be honest, five years ago I could not imagine that I would be an electrician, an electrician, let's say, with qualifications. Well, today I realize that I really am... it turns out that this was hiding in me. And I discovered it five years ago. And now I'm doing what I love to do. 
Interviewer: So everything is great. I mean, as I understand it, you realized in the process that you really like it, right? 
Informant: Yes, yes, yes, yes. That's absolutely right. I took a job as a driver. Here, in this organization, as a driver. And so in the process, in the process, I realized that, as they say, I love electricity. I love doing it. I love to kind of bring light into the house, here to make people happy. 
Interviewer: No, well that's true. It's an interesting job, besides. And initially, if you think back to your childhood, what did you plan to become? How did you imagine your future work, education? 
Informant: I planned to be a trucker all my life. I don't know whether it's funny or not, but I always wanted to be a trucker. I mean I've had since I was a kid, let's say, used to like.... I've loved to do, as they say, communicating with machinery since I was a kid. Making cars, well, any kind of machinery in general, in principle. So I always wanted to become a trucker. I mean, there used to be trucker movies. Well, I kind of wanted to. But it turned out somehow, so far it hasn't worked out. But it turned out better than I wanted.
Interviewer: How did you become an electrician? What went wrong? Why didn't you become a trucker? Can you tell us? 
Informant: I became an electrician... Well, my grandfather was an electrician, worked in a mine. My father worked in the mine for many years. Now he also works in the city power grid. He's also an electrician. So I had some experience too. Also, let's say, related to electricity, he had. I was working. And somehow, just the director, when I got a job, eventually the director just suggested that I move to electricians, to try my hand. You like it, you stay. If you don't like it, you go back to driving. So, well, I tried it, took a risk. And today I realize that, as they say, genes. My whole family was practically electricians. 
Interviewer: Now let's talk about education. The same question - what do you think it means to get a good education? 
Informant: To get a good education is to translate it into today's, let's say, Russian language - it means earning good money, first of all. If you earn good money, you have an opportunity to live well, not to deny yourself anything. In the future, as they say, to give good education to children. That is, let's say, to lay the foundation for a good future of children. Well, in principle, I think I answered the question.
Interviewer: And what do you think is more valued in education now, again, in Russia? Concrete skills that will be useful in the workplace, or some more intellectual development, more abstract? 
Informant: Well, everything is probably valued now. It turns out that if you put it all together, it probably is. I mean there's no separation, I think so. 
Interviewer: And it should be both, right?
Informant: Yes. And it should be both. 
Interviewer: What do you think are the most promising specialties for young people now, attractive for employers? 
Informant: For employers? Well, for an employer, as they say, if a person can do everything, and wants to be able to do everything. That's for the employer, I think that's the most basic thing. Exactly for the employer.
Interviewer: So the main thing is motivation and desire, right? 
Informant: Yes. That's the main thing. Yes, absolutely right. I mean, if the employer, let's say, motivates the employee in the right way, then the employee will naturally be himself personally, as they say, for the sake of interest, well in that. 
Interviewer: Did your parents have any expectations, ideas about your studies? 
Informant: Well, of course. As they say, like every parent had expectations for every child. That I would study well, that in the future I would work in a profession. But in the end, of course, I didn't study a profession. I studied in principle not bad, normal. I mean, my parents were like, well. He studied. Well, it's like that, yes, there were hopes. And I don't think I broke their hopes in my direction. 
Interviewer: And did your parents, people close to you, people around you, did your parents have any expectations about how your life would turn out in general? That you would get married, for example. Have 5 children, I don't know, build a house? 
Informant: No, I didn't. I mean, we had, I don't know, we had such an upbringing. We had freedom of choice, basically our parents said: "If you want to do something, do it, we will help you. If you want to do something, we'll help you. If you don't want to do it, don't do it." So we had freedom of choice. 
Interviewer: So there was no pressure that you had to become this and that? 
Informant: No, no. There was absolutely no pressure.
Interviewer: Did you ever have to lie as a child in order not to let down the expectations of the family? 
Informant: Of course, of course.
Interviewer: And in what instances, for example? 
Informant: Yeah, I can't remember now. 
Interviewer: There's a D in the diary. 
Informant: Oh, well, more like bad behavior, I guess. Yes, twos in the diary, how can they not say about twos. But about bad behavior, yes there was a case. You had to lie, let's say. 
Interviewer: In general, somehow, it seemed that you were given freedom of choice in general, but on the other hand you sometimes lied about your bad behavior. So did your parents somehow control you or did they give you complete freedom and independence? 
Informant: No, they controlled me. In any case, they had limits. But I want to say that they gave me freedom of action after I finished technical school. Because I was already an adult, you could say a man. There was already freedom of choice. And so naturally, when I was a young man, naturally there was control, but it was mild, let's say. 
Interviewer: Would you like your parents to understand something about you that they haven't realized until now? 
Informant: Again, please. 
Interviewer: Well, you've become what you've become now. You work where you like to work. Do your parents know about that? Have they changed their view of you in any way, maybe for the better? 
Informant: Well, to be honest, how can I tell you. I so think they should be asked that question. 
Interviewer: So you've never discussed it like that, talked about it like that? 
Informant: No, no. No, we didn't discuss it, we didn't talk about it. No, it never happened like that. I mean, if you ask them, they would answer. I find it difficult to be honest. 
Interviewer: I see. And what were your original plans for your future life? Well, not only about education, already about career, but in general, did you have any? 
Informant: Well, plans like any man, as they say, to give birth to a son, build a house and plant a tree. Well, of course, the plan is to become, let's say, self-sufficient. That is, to have no difficulties. Well, to become, let's say, a self-sufficient man. That's what we're trying to do. 
Interviewer: Did all your plans come true?
Informant: Yes, practically. I mean 99.5% of them have come true.
Interviewer: Good.
Informant: Yeah. Well, almost, almost. We're on the verge, let's put it that way. 
Interviewer: That's great. And do you currently feel completely free to make decisions about life? 
Informant: No, no. No. There are times, I mean I have parents. I'll reiterate that the upbringing is such that I'm still that. I am 32 years old, but still, naturally, I go to my parents for advice. I consult with my parents, with my wife. That is, of course, I consult with my closest people. And well, naturally, that is, the main choice is mine, of course. But I still ask for advice. 
Interviewer: Let's move on to the next topic. In what cases or under what conditions does a person want to really work? That is, he is motivated. 
Informant: A person wants to work when he has, again I repeat, a good salary. Let's say, a vocation at work. That is, well, as they say, for the employer to recognize that you are a valuable worker. That's the way it is. So, the salary. Well, and the pleasure of work, respectively. Those are the three main criteria.
Interviewer: Do your efforts always lead to the desired result? 
Informant: No. Well, it depends on the environment, on the circumstances. Well, on the people. 
Interviewer: So, in general, what do you rely on when making important decisions? Well, maybe besides the advice of your relatives. If you face some difficult decision, a difficult choice, how do you consider the alternatives, how do you make a decision in the end? 
Informant: Well, I turn on my brain. I predict the result. That is, I always weigh the pros and cons. Well, as they say, there is a good saying: "Measure seven times, cut once". So there is such a long-lasting moment in making a decision. So it's like I measure seven times and cut once. 
Interviewer: Can you give me an example, if you remember, of a difficult life choice? 
Informant: Well, an example? It took me almost 7 years to buy a house, let's say. I mean, thinking, thinking. Decided, decided, decided. In general, in the end, in the end, I told you - 7 years of calculating. 
Interviewer: Wow. 
Informant: We thought, we decided. Weighed all the pros and cons. We were a little bit hasty with the purchase. So, naturally, now it's different. That is, we are looking for other approaches to such specific issues. 
Interviewer: Did someone help you make the right decision then? How did you decide in the end? 
Informant: Then, how? Well, yes, my spouse helped me to make that decision. The right one, let's put it that way. There was advice from my parents, naturally, from my relatives. Well, with my spouse, let's say that... well, my wife and I were barely speaking. And at one point we made this decision. Everything is fine, in general, everything turned out well. Thank you very much to my wife. 
Interviewer: In general, do you think a person can afford to seek advice from people around them? Not necessarily close people. Or should he always rely only on himself? 
Informant: No, a person should rely only on himself. He can ask for advice, he can, let's say, listen to a thousand people. But, still, one should rely only on oneself. 
Interviewer: Why can't you trust other people's decisions? 
Informant: No, it's not that, trust, as they say, these people, right? You have to trust people. Here, but I say that: "It is obligatory to weigh everything". There's no such thing as one. if you listen to everybody, as they say, you can get into trouble. If you start trusting everybody. That's why you should always have your own head on your shoulders. Still, I think you should only trust yourself. That is, listen to the opinion of others and weigh everything. And make your own. But, as they say, you will make your own conclusion, and then in the future, that is, even if, for example, you decide something wrong, you will blame yourself, not someone else. 
Interviewer: So the responsibility lies with you in this case? 
Informant: Yes. In any case, if the issue concerns me, for example, I have to take full responsibility. 
Interviewer: Do you think people in Russia in general, do you think it's easy for them to ask for help from others? Or do they only do everything themselves? 
Informant: Well, they probably do everything themselves. Because people are, I don't know, ashamed to ask for help. So, like, maybe pride doesn't allow it. Because I think that's why they do everything themselves. 
Interviewer: He who doesn't take risks doesn't drink champagne. Do you agree with this statement and does it apply to you? 
Informant: No for today, I guess it's not right. Well, it's not the right expression, let's say. I mean, for me personally, it's generally straightforward..... I mean, you can risk so much that you can lose everything. And as if I value life so much, let's say, I value my family so much, so I won't take a risk, for example. So risk is not for me, let's say.
Interviewer: And in general, what are the barriers? 
Informant: Barriers?
Interviewer: Yeah. Why don't people take risks? Although risk is two sides always. You can get a big gain from risk. Or you can really lose everything. But still, there is a probability of winning. 
Informant: Well, there is a probability. But I would say that each person has his own head on his shoulders. That is, he defines his own barriers, as they say. Every person determines his own barriers. I mean, if he's, I don't know. If he wants to take risks, let him take risks. It's everybody's business in principle.
Interviewer: Let's move on to the last questions, to the last topic. Do you follow the generally accepted norms of behavior? 
Informant: Absolutely. Of course, yes. I have children, I am an example for my children, for my nephews. So that's why I naturally follow, absolutely.
Interviewer: Did you sometimes break the rules? 
Informant: Yes. Like every person, in principle, of course. 
Interviewer: And what do you think holds people back from crossing the norms in general? 
Informant: First of all, upbringing. Education. Well, upbringing, of course, so that parents don't blush for their children. Well, in principle today the law is not particularly cruel. I think that people are also afraid of the law. So, in principle there are people left like that, well, like. 
Interviewer: What if, from the point of view of the law, no punishment is prescribed? If a person violates the norms of behavior? What consequences can it lead to?
Informant: Well, it's chaos. Civil war. It's 100% - it will be a mess. The world mess will be a mess. There has to be a law. 
Interviewer: And, if a person did violate the norms of behavior? Will the consequences always be negative in the long run? 
Informant: No, why? No, not always. Like it would be a lesson for the person. 
Interviewer: Have you ever had a situation in your life where you thought about what people around you would think of you? 
Informant: Yes, of course, many, many, many, many times. 
Interviewer: And does that affect your decision making? 
Informant: Yes, yes, of course it does. 
Interviewer: Is it bad or right to think about what people around you think about you? What do you think? 
Informant: Well, to some extent, probably, it is right. Because, well, you have to deal with people nowadays. Here.
Interviewer: Have you had situations where you couldn't stop feeling guilty? A lot of people, for example, can't sleep for a long time. Constantly remembering some of their actions from the past.
Informant: Well, yes, of course there have been. This I think is a normal human reaction. Here, and to draw conclusions. I mean, how to say? In order not to repeat this in the future, I think that..... well, it's normal. 
Interviewer: Is guilt harmful excessively? 
Informant: Yes, of course, of course. Absolutely. I mean, it turns out to be self-eating, so to speak. It's a psychological, it's a heavy thing that can lead to, I don't know, a nervous breakdown, for example. 
Interviewer: How else can it affect a person's behavior? What do you think? 
Informant: Well, often people eat up guilt. They start to, I don't know, do bad things. They start drinking, for example. I don't know, they start to ruin themselves in every possible way. 
Interviewer: And in what situations does a person feel shame? And in what situations does he feel guilty? What do you think is the difference between these emotions? Because they're very similar.
Informant: Well, guilt... shame is when you do something serious, right? That's shame. Well, that's often, as they say, that's the kind of thing that doesn't get fixed. And guilt is, let's say, if you offended a person with a word, well, yes, that's guilt. And naturally, time heals. So you can apologize, and a person will forgive you and apologize, let's say. 
Interviewer: That is, when a person is guilty of something, he can send it away. And shame, you can't do that anymore. Am I understanding that correctly? 
Informant: Well, yes I think so. 
Interviewer: One last question. What actions or even thoughts do you think a person should be ashamed of? 
Informant: Yes. 
Interviewer: Or should be - it's bad and you shouldn't say that. 
Informant: Shame is probably rape, murder all sorts of things. Crimes.
Interviewer: I mean for something that's serious. 
Informant: Well, murder in principle is grave.
Interviewer: Well, yes. Well, all right, thank you. That was basically the last question. Look how fast it went. And it wasn't scary at all, was it? 
Informant: No, of course not. I mean, some of the questions were so tricky, they stumped me a little bit. But, in principle, in general, yes. In general, I sort of answered well, I sort of got out of it. 
Interviewer: Elvir, thank you very much for participating. You really told a lot of examples from your life. And your opinion and your questions were really tricky. But I think you answered them very well. That's very important to me. Thank you very much for helping me. 
Informant: Thank you, I tried. I hope it helps you too. 
Interviewee: Yes, thank you very much. 
Interview7.wav
Interviewer: My name is Angelina. I study at the Higher School of Economics. And as part of my thesis I'm conducting a research that aims to study social norms and expectations in Russia. Thank you for once again agreeing to participate in this interview. I would very much ask you to answer as sincerely and honestly as possible. This is by no means a test. There are no right or wrong answers here, it is your opinion and your position that is most important to me. I guarantee you complete anonymity. All your answers will be used in a general way, no audio recording goes anywhere at all. This is a conversation that no one will ever hear. I will just make notes to myself during the conversation, write. The duration will be about 50-45 minutes, as it goes, it may be shorter.
Informant: Okay. 
Interviewer: Then briefly tell us a little bit about yourself first. I've already introduced myself. What's your name, how old are you, where do you work. And maybe you have some hobbies, hobbies. 
Informant: My name is Elvir. Two years, married. Two children. I work in the emergency service. Here, from hobbies - cars. What? Well, basically, cars, I like to play volleyball. I like tennis. I mean, sports. Basically sports in general. 
Interviewer: That's great.
Informant: So I'm into everything I can. 
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. Then the first question is probably the most difficult one at the beginning. If you think back to your whole life, from childhood to now, what do you think were your happiest, most important moments? And maybe the unhappiest, negative ones. Can you tell us? 
Informant: So, well, the happiest moments are naturally, well, kindergarten, naturally, I remember badly. Here, like any human being, in idea. Here, well the happiest moments - when I went to school, when I finished, naturally, to study. That is the first kiss, of course, the happiest moment. Later on, i.e. student life. It was a fairy tale in principle. The next step was, of course. I don't know, a lot of people say that, but in a good, let's say. a good fairy tale in my life was the service in the army. Then naturally... ah, well marriage, that's right. I was in the army, I got married a year before the army, then naturally I went into the army. And then the children were born. First a son, then a daughter three years later. That's the most, the most, the most, naturally. Then the purchase of housing.
Interviewer: And why is army service one of the happiest moments? 
Informant: Army service? Well, service in the army is, let's say, hardening. So I went to the army as a kid. And I came back already so, let's say, matured. Well, a man, so to speak. So I think that one of the good moments in my life was my military service. 
Interviewer: Did the people around you think the same thing? That it was an important moment in your life?
Informant: The people around you? Well, no. They didn't. I have... the thing is I went into the army and I had my son a month later. Yeah so I...like I have a very strong memory of the moment of the army just because of the son. Probably because of that. And I lived, let's say I served in the army knowing that I was going to have a son when I was a civilian. So here it was very strongly remembered. 
Interviewer: I see. And if we talk about some, maybe, important and good events for you. Were there any?
Informant: No, in my life I don't see one, not one, as they say, bad some kind of bad moment in my life. The only thing is that I have, let's say that I may have..... or rather it can't be, but it is - the loss of relatives. Let's just say from the negative moments in my life. 
Interviewer: I see. And do you think that's what you're describing now, right? These are the happy days of your life and the negative days at the same time. Do you think other people have, roughly similar descriptions of their lives, or maybe different?
Informant: I think that if a person knows what are, as they say, the happy moments of life and what are the negative moments, I think so - we probably have 90% agreement. 
Interviewer: So there is some general idea of what is a happy moment? 
Informant: Yes, yes, yes. Absolutely right. If a person understands that, then I think they would agree with me. 
Interviewer: Thank you for sharing. I'm going to move on to more specific, narrower questions. What do you think a successful career is all about? Or a successful, ideal job? 
Informant: Okay. Well, a successful... well, in principle, any work should be, let's say, done with pleasure. That is, if a person works at a job he likes, if he does a job he likes, it means that he will reach the heights. That is, if he is engaged in his favorite work, then a person has a goal, a person has aspiration. To reach, let's say, the highest level. So he will, then rather he will naturally go uphill. 
Interviewer: And what do you think is more motivating in Russia exactly?
Informant: In Russia? 
Interviewer: Yes. Interesting, favorite job, field of activity or high salary? 
Informant: At the moment, probably, most likely, a high salary. I think so. 
Interviewer: Is it often or rarely that people can combine an interesting job and a good salary? 
Informant: Probably extremely rare, I think so. People even if, let's say, a janitor is offered, I don't know, well, roughly speaking, to go.... but, it's not for everyone, the highest amount, then the janitor will also go to do it. Because, well, in Russia there is, let's say, such a tendency that in Russia, well, money rules today. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that despite the fact that some people work hard and try hard, their professional destiny does not work out? And why, if so. 
Informant: Of course, of course. That's absolutely true. That's 100%, let's put it that way. 
Interviewer: And why is that? What could be the reasons? What's going wrong? 
Informant: Right. Again, please repeat the question again. 
Interviewer: Do you agree that despite the fact that some people work hard and try hard, their professional destiny doesn't work out. Well, for example, a person in the office, at work or whatever, overworks a lot. Really both at home and at work constantly thinks about work, tries, tries to show high results. But he does not get any remuneration for it. As if nobody needs it in the end. 
Informant: I see. Well, yes, the question is clear. We have such, let's say, a problem in Russia. Everywhere with good positions and good salaries, relatives, let's say, work everywhere. Relatives, their own people. That is, not for merit, but exactly as they say, as they say, how to say it correctly, in the common people - it is all done through a furry hand. And those who are really engaged in their favorite business, who want to earn money, work, work, work. As they say, he doesn't earn shit, let's put it that way. 
Interviewer: Ah, what do you think....
Informant: That's why the anecdote.
Interviewer: Yeah. Is your job specifically what you were originally aiming for? 
Informant: Yes, absolutely. I mean, to be honest, five years ago I could not imagine that I would be an electrician, an electrician, let's say, with qualifications. Well, today I realize that I really am... it turns out that this was hiding in me. And I discovered it five years ago. And now I'm doing what I love to do. 
Interviewer: So everything is great. I mean, as I understand it, you realized in the process that you really like it, right? 
Informant: Yes, yes, yes, yes. That's absolutely right. I took a job as a driver. Here, in this organization, as a driver. And so in the process, in the process, I realized that, as they say, I love electricity. I love doing it. I love to kind of bring light into the house, here to make people happy. 
Interviewer: No, well that's true. It's an interesting job, besides. And initially, if you think back to your childhood, what did you plan to become? How did you imagine your future work, education? 
Informant: I planned to be a trucker all my life. I don't know whether it's funny or not, but I always wanted to be a trucker. I mean I've had since I was a kid, let's say, used to like.... I've loved to do, as they say, communicating with machinery since I was a kid. Making cars, well, any kind of machinery in general, in principle. So I always wanted to become a trucker. I mean, there used to be trucker movies. Well, I kind of wanted to. But it turned out somehow, so far it hasn't worked out. But it turned out better than I wanted.
Interviewer: How did you become an electrician? What went wrong? Why didn't you become a trucker? Can you tell us? 
Informant: I became an electrician... Well, my grandfather was an electrician, worked in a mine. My father worked in the mine for many years. Now he also works in the city power grid. He's also an electrician. So I had some experience too. Also, let's say, related to electricity, he had. I was working. And somehow, just the director, when I got a job, eventually the director just suggested that I move to electricians, to try my hand. You like it, you stay. If you don't like it, you go back to driving. So, well, I tried it, took a risk. And today I realize that, as they say, genes. My whole family was practically electricians. 
Interviewer: Now let's talk about education. The same question - what do you think it means to get a good education? 
Informant: To get a good education is to translate it into today's, let's say, Russian language - it means earning good money, first of all. If you earn good money, you have an opportunity to live well, not to deny yourself anything. In the future, as they say, to give good education to children. That is, let's say, to lay the foundation for a good future of children. Well, in principle, I think I answered the question.
Interviewer: And what do you think is more valued in education now, again, in Russia? Concrete skills that will be useful in the workplace, or some more intellectual development, more abstract? 
Informant: Well, everything is probably valued now. It turns out that if you put it all together, it probably is. I mean there's no separation, I think so. 
Interviewer: And it should be both, right?
Informant: Yes. And it should be both. 
Interviewer: What do you think are the most promising specialties for young people now, attractive for employers? 
Informant: For employers? Well, for an employer, as they say, if a person can do everything, and wants to be able to do everything. That's for the employer, I think that's the most basic thing. Exactly for the employer.
Interviewer: So the main thing is motivation and desire, right? 
Informant: Yes. That's the main thing. Yes, absolutely right. I mean, if the employer, let's say, motivates the employee in the right way, then the employee will naturally be himself personally, as they say, for the sake of interest, well in that. 
Interviewer: Did your parents have any expectations, ideas about your studies? 
Informant: Well, of course. As they say, like every parent had expectations for every child. That I would study well, that in the future I would work in a profession. But in the end, of course, I didn't study a profession. I studied in principle not bad, normal. I mean, my parents were like, well. He studied. Well, it's like that, yes, there were hopes. And I don't think I broke their hopes in my direction. 
Interviewer: And did your parents, people close to you, people around you, did your parents have any expectations about how your life would turn out in general? That you would get married, for example. Have 5 children, I don't know, build a house? 
Informant: No, I didn't. I mean, we had, I don't know, we had such an upbringing. We had freedom of choice, basically our parents said: "If you want to do something, do it, we will help you. If you want to do something, we'll help you. If you don't want to do it, don't do it." So we had freedom of choice. 
Interviewer: So there was no pressure that you had to become this and that? 
Informant: No, no. There was absolutely no pressure.
Interviewer: Did you ever have to lie as a child in order not to let down the expectations of the family? 
Informant: Of course, of course.
Interviewer: And in what instances, for example? 
Informant: Yeah, I can't remember now. 
Interviewer: There's a D in the diary. 
Informant: Oh, well, more like bad behavior, I guess. Yes, twos in the diary, how can they not say about twos. But about bad behavior, yes there was a case. You had to lie, let's say. 
Interviewer: In general, somehow, it seemed that you were given freedom of choice in general, but on the other hand you sometimes lied about your bad behavior. So did your parents somehow control you or did they give you complete freedom and independence? 
Informant: No, they controlled me. In any case, they had limits. But I want to say that they gave me freedom of action after I finished technical school. Because I was already an adult, you could say a man. There was already freedom of choice. And so naturally, when I was a young man, naturally there was control, but it was mild, let's say. 
Interviewer: Would you like your parents to understand something about you that they haven't realized until now? 
Informant: Again, please. 
Interviewer: Well, you've become what you've become now. You work where you like to work. Do your parents know about that? Have they changed their view of you in any way, maybe for the better? 
Informant: Well, to be honest, how can I tell you. I so think they should be asked that question. 
Interviewer: So you've never discussed it like that, talked about it like that? 
Informant: No, no. No, we didn't discuss it, we didn't talk about it. No, it never happened like that. I mean, if you ask them, they would answer. I find it difficult to be honest. 
Interviewer: I see. And what were your original plans for your future life? Well, not only about education, already about career, but in general, did you have any? 
Informant: Well, plans like any man, as they say, to give birth to a son, build a house and plant a tree. Well, of course, the plan is to become, let's say, self-sufficient. That is, to have no difficulties. Well, to become, let's say, a self-sufficient man. That's what we're trying to do. 
Interviewer: Did all your plans come true?
Informant: Yes, practically. I mean 99.5% of them have come true.
Interviewer: Good.
Informant: Yeah. Well, almost, almost. We're on the verge, let's put it that way. 
Interviewer: That's great. And do you currently feel completely free to make decisions about life? 
Informant: No, no. No. There are times, I mean I have parents. I'll reiterate that the upbringing is such that I'm still that. I am 32 years old, but still, naturally, I go to my parents for advice. I consult with my parents, with my wife. That is, of course, I consult with my closest people. And well, naturally, that is, the main choice is mine, of course. But I still ask for advice. 
Interviewer: Let's move on to the next topic. In what cases or under what conditions does a person want to really work? That is, he is motivated. 
Informant: A person wants to work when he has, again I repeat, a good salary. Let's say, a vocation at work. That is, well, as they say, for the employer to recognize that you are a valuable worker. That's the way it is. So, the salary. Well, and the pleasure of work, respectively. Those are the three main criteria.
Interviewer: Do your efforts always lead to the desired result? 
Informant: No. Well, it depends on the environment, on the circumstances. Well, on the people. 
Interviewer: So, in general, what do you rely on when making important decisions? Well, maybe besides the advice of your relatives. If you face some difficult decision, a difficult choice, how do you consider the alternatives, how do you make a decision in the end? 
Informant: Well, I turn on my brain. I predict the result. That is, I always weigh the pros and cons. Well, as they say, there is a good saying: "Measure seven times, cut once". So there is such a long-lasting moment in making a decision. So it's like I measure seven times and cut once. 
Interviewer: Can you give me an example, if you remember, of a difficult life choice? 
Informant: Well, an example? It took me almost 7 years to buy a house, let's say. I mean, thinking, thinking. Decided, decided, decided. In general, in the end, in the end, I told you - 7 years of calculating. 
Interviewer: Wow. 
Informant: We thought, we decided. Weighed all the pros and cons. We were a little bit hasty with the purchase. So, naturally, now it's different. That is, we are looking for other approaches to such specific issues. 
Interviewer: Did someone help you make the right decision then? How did you decide in the end? 
Informant: Then, how? Well, yes, my spouse helped me to make that decision. The right one, let's put it that way. There was advice from my parents, naturally, from my relatives. Well, with my spouse, let's say that... well, my wife and I were barely speaking. And at one point we made this decision. Everything is fine, in general, everything turned out well. Thank you very much to my wife. 
Interviewer: In general, do you think a person can afford to seek advice from people around them? Not necessarily close people. Or should he always rely only on himself? 
Informant: No, a person should rely only on himself. He can ask for advice, he can, let's say, listen to a thousand people. But, still, one should rely only on oneself. 
Interviewer: Why can't you trust other people's decisions? 
Informant: No, it's not that, trust, as they say, these people, right? You have to trust people. Here, but I say that: "It is obligatory to weigh everything". There's no such thing as one. if you listen to everybody, as they say, you can get into trouble. If you start trusting everybody. That's why you should always have your own head on your shoulders. Still, I think you should only trust yourself. That is, listen to the opinion of others and weigh everything. And make your own. But, as they say, you will make your own conclusion, and then in the future, that is, even if, for example, you decide something wrong, you will blame yourself, not someone else. 
Interviewer: So the responsibility lies with you in this case? 
Informant: Yes. In any case, if the issue concerns me, for example, I have to take full responsibility. 
Interviewer: Do you think people in Russia in general, do you think it's easy for them to ask for help from others? Or do they only do everything themselves? 
Informant: Well, they probably do everything themselves. Because people are, I don't know, ashamed to ask for help. So, like, maybe pride doesn't allow it. Because I think that's why they do everything themselves. 
Interviewer: He who doesn't take risks doesn't drink champagne. Do you agree with this statement and does it apply to you? 
Informant: No for today, I guess it's not right. Well, it's not the right expression, let's say. I mean, for me personally, it's generally straightforward..... I mean, you can risk so much that you can lose everything. And as if I value life so much, let's say, I value my family so much, so I won't take a risk, for example. So risk is not for me, let's say.
Interviewer: And in general, what are the barriers? 
Informant: Barriers?
Interviewer: Yeah. Why don't people take risks? Although risk is two sides always. You can get a big gain from risk. Or you can really lose everything. But still, there is a probability of winning. 
Informant: Well, there is a probability. But I would say that each person has his own head on his shoulders. That is, he defines his own barriers, as they say. Every person determines his own barriers. I mean, if he's, I don't know. If he wants to take risks, let him take risks. It's everybody's business in principle.
Interviewer: Let's move on to the last questions, to the last topic. Do you follow the generally accepted norms of behavior? 
Informant: Absolutely. Of course, yes. I have children, I am an example for my children, for my nephews. So that's why I naturally follow, absolutely.
Interviewer: Did you sometimes break the rules? 
Informant: Yes. Like every person, in principle, of course. 
Interviewer: And what do you think holds people back from crossing the norms in general? 
Informant: First of all, upbringing. Education. Well, upbringing, of course, so that parents don't blush for their children. Well, in principle today the law is not particularly cruel. I think that people are also afraid of the law. So, in principle there are people left like that, well, like. 
Interviewer: What if, from the point of view of the law, no punishment is prescribed? If a person violates the norms of behavior? What consequences can it lead to?
Informant: Well, it's chaos. Civil war. It's 100% - it will be a mess. The world mess will be a mess. There has to be a law. 
Interviewer: And, if a person did violate the norms of behavior? Will the consequences always be negative in the long run? 
Informant: No, why? No, not always. Like it would be a lesson for the person. 
Interviewer: Have you ever had a situation in your life where you thought about what people around you would think of you? 
Informant: Yes, of course, many, many, many, many times. 
Interviewer: And does that affect your decision making? 
Informant: Yes, yes, of course it does. 
Interviewer: Is it bad or right to think about what people around you think about you? What do you think? 
Informant: Well, to some extent, probably, it is right. Because, well, you have to deal with people nowadays. Here.
Interviewer: Have you had situations where you couldn't stop feeling guilty? A lot of people, for example, can't sleep for a long time. Constantly remembering some of their actions from the past.
Informant: Well, yes, of course there have been. This I think is a normal human reaction. Here, and to draw conclusions. I mean, how to say? In order not to repeat this in the future, I think that..... well, it's normal. 
Interviewer: Is guilt harmful excessively? 
Informant: Yes, of course, of course. Absolutely. I mean, it turns out to be self-eating, so to speak. It's a psychological, it's a heavy thing that can lead to, I don't know, a nervous breakdown, for example. 
Interviewer: How else can it affect a person's behavior? What do you think? 
Informant: Well, often people eat up guilt. They start to, I don't know, do bad things. They start drinking, for example. I don't know, they start to ruin themselves in every possible way. 
Interviewer: And in what situations does a person feel shame? And in what situations does he feel guilty? What do you think is the difference between these emotions? Because they're very similar.
Informant: Well, guilt... shame is when you do something serious, right? That's shame. Well, that's often, as they say, that's the kind of thing that doesn't get fixed. And guilt is, let's say, if you offended a person with a word, well, yes, that's guilt. And naturally, time heals. So you can apologize, and a person will forgive you and apologize, let's say. 
Interviewer: That is, when a person is guilty of something, he can send it away. And shame, you can't do that anymore. Am I understanding that correctly? 
Informant: Well, yes I think so. 
Interviewer: One last question. What actions or even thoughts do you think a person should be ashamed of? 
Informant: Yes. 
Interviewer: Or should be - it's bad and you shouldn't say that. 
Informant: Shame is probably rape, murder all sorts of things. Crimes.
Interviewer: I mean for something that's serious. 
Informant: Well, murder in principle is grave.
Interviewer: Well, yes. Well, all right, thank you. That was basically the last question. Look how fast it went. And it wasn't scary at all, was it? 
Informant: No, of course not. I mean, some of the questions were so tricky, they stumped me a little bit. But, in principle, in general, yes. In general, I sort of answered well, I sort of got out of it. 
Interviewer: Elvir, thank you very much for participating. You really told a lot of examples from your life. And your opinion and your questions were really tricky. But I think you answered them very well. That's very important to me. Thank you very much for helping me. 
Informant: Thank you, I tried. I hope it helps you too. 
Interviewer: Yes, thank you very much. 
